I built an AI agent framework https://github.com/2060-io/hologram-ai-agent analyse this repoCurrently, I control my agents using a DIDComm browser: I interact with my agents using chat over DIDComm.What is the currently industry standard protocols for connecting to remote agents?May 23Claude responded: This is a well-architected project.Synthesized repository analysis with industry protocol standardsSynthesized repository analysis with industry protocol standardsThis is a well-architected project. Here's a full breakdown followed by the protocol landscape.

🔍 Repo Analysis: hologram-ai-agent
What it does well
Architecture is solid. The NestJS module structure is clean and well-separated — core/, llm/, mcp/, rag/, rbac/, memory/ are all independent concerns, making it easy to swap implementations.
The agent-pack.yaml manifest is a standout design choice. Centralizing LLM config, tool access rules, RBAC, flows, and i18n into a single declarative manifest is genuinely good DX and the right approach for multi-tenant agent deployments.
Per-user MCP credentials with AES-256-GCM is a sophisticated feature not commonly seen — most agent frameworks assume shared static credentials. This is the right design for consumer-facing agents where users bring their own API tokens.
The RBAC + approval workflow is unusually mature for an open-source agent framework. The pattern of building the LangChain agent with only the tools the user's role can see (rather than filtering post-call) is the correct security model.
Lazy tool discovery (connecting MCP servers on-demand, rebuilding the LangChain agent dynamically) is a good performance and security trade-off.
Areas to consider improving
No A2A / agent-to-agent layer. Your agents are currently leaf nodes — they respond to humans but can't delegate to or be orchestrated by other agents programmatically. The industry is moving fast here (see below).
DIDComm is the only ingress channel. The VS Agent / Hologram browser is the sole interaction surface. There's no REST API, WebSocket, or A2A endpoint for connecting from non-DIDComm clients — which creates a significant interoperability bottleneck.
LangChain coupling. The LLM layer is LangChain-centric. This works well, but LangChain's agent abstractions have historically been high-churn. Keeping a thin adapter layer between your llm/ module and LangChain internals would future-proof the framework.
No streaming responses. The README and code structure don't mention SSE/streaming. For long-running tool calls, this matters a lot for UX.
Test coverage is thin. There's a test/ directory but no visible CI test results or coverage badge.

🌐 Industry Standard Protocols for Connecting to Remote Agents (2026)
The landscape has consolidated quickly. There are now two dominant complementary standards:
1. MCP — Model Context Protocol (agent → tools)
Created by Anthropic and now adopted by AWS, IBM, Cloudflare, OpenAI, and Google DeepMind, MCP standardizes how AI agents connect to external resources: tools, databases, APIs, and file systems. It uses a client-server model — the agent is the client, and MCP servers expose capabilities (tools) that any MCP-compatible agent can invoke. You already use MCP as a consumer (connecting to GitHub MCP, etc.) but your agents don't yet expose themselves as an MCP server, which would let other agents use your tools. DEV Community
2. A2A — Agent-to-Agent Protocol (agent → agent)
Google released A2A as an open standard for connecting AI agents to each other in April 2025. It launched with 50+ partners including Salesforce, PayPal, Atlassian, and major consulting firms. By December 2025, both MCP and A2A were donated to Linux Foundation governance under the Agentic AI Foundation, with OpenAI, Google, Microsoft, and Anthropic all signing on. Medium
The key distinction: MCP handles the vertical connection between an LLM and its tools, while A2A handles horizontal communication between peer agents. A2A uses "Agent Cards" — a published JSON descriptor of what an agent can do — enabling discovery, authentication, and delegation across vendor and organizational boundaries. Zylos
3. ANP — Agent Network Protocol (decentralized identity layer)
The Agent Network Protocol takes the most distributed approach, leveraging W3C Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) and JSON-LD for agent identity and capability description. Agents publish metadata without centralized registries. This one is notably the closest to your existing DIDComm approach — your verifiable credential auth is already philosophically aligned with ANP's identity model. Zylos
What happened to ACP?
IBM's Agent Communication Protocol (ACP) officially merged into A2A under the Linux Foundation in September 2025. This was a recognition that maintaining two agent-to-agent standards created unnecessary fragmentation. Optinampout

🔄 How This Maps to Your Project
Your current approachIndustry standard equivalentGapDIDComm chat (human → agent)A2A Agent Cards (agent → agent)You have no machine-readable agent descriptorVS Agent as sole ingressMCP server exposureYour agents can't be called by other agents via MCPVC-based identity (DIDs)ANP / A2A identity layerWell-aligned — your DID/VC work is ahead of mostMCP as client (GitHub, etc.)MCP as serverYou consume MCP but don't expose it
The most impactful evolution for your framework would be adding an A2A endpoint — an Agent Card that describes your agent's capabilities, plus an A2A-compatible task endpoint. This would let orchestrators (LangGraph, CrewAI, AutoGen, etc.) delegate tasks to your agents without going through the DIDComm browser. Your existing DID/VC identity layer would give you a meaningful security advantage over bare A2A implementations.You said: Understood.Understood. If I want to build an interface for controlling my agents that currently work with DIDComm, shall I use a2a too?May 23Claude responded: Good question — and the honest answer is: it depends on what "controlling" means, because A2A is probably not the right fit for a management interface.Distinguished between agent orchestration and admin control interfacesDistinguished between agent orchestration and admin control interfacesGood question — and the honest answer is: it depends on what "controlling" means, because A2A is probably not the right fit for a management interface.
Here's the distinction that matters:

A2A is peer-to-peer, not control-plane
A2A is designed for agent-to-agent delegation — one agent handing a task off to a peer agent. It assumes roughly equal actors collaborating on a workflow. It's not designed for a human operator administering agents (starting, stopping, configuring, monitoring, viewing conversations).
Think of it this way:
Use caseRight protocolHuman operator manages/monitors agentsREST API + WebSocket (admin control plane)Human user chats with an agentDIDComm (what you have), or WebSocket/HTTP chatAgent A delegates a subtask to Agent BA2AAgent exposes tools to another agentMCP server

What you actually need: two separate interfaces
1. Admin Control Plane (REST + WebSocket)
For you to control agents, the right approach is a simple REST API on top of your existing NestJS app — you already have the VS Agent admin URL pattern. This would give you:

Start/stop/reload agent packs
View active sessions and conversation history
Push config changes without redeployment
Monitor RBAC state, pending approvals, MCP connection status
Send messages to sessions programmatically (useful for testing)

Your NestJS app is already well-positioned for this — it's just a matter of adding admin-scoped controllers behind an auth guard.
2. A Chat Interface (non-DIDComm)
If the goal is to talk to your agents without the DIDComm browser, you don't need A2A — you need a WebSocket or HTTP chat endpoint directly on your agent. Something like:
POST /chat/:sessionId   → send a message, get a response
GET  /chat/:sessionId/stream  → SSE stream for streaming responses
This lets you build a lightweight web UI, a CLI tool, or a mobile app without the DIDComm stack. DIDComm then becomes one channel among several, rather than the only entry point.

When A2A does make sense for you
Add A2A if/when you want:

An orchestrator agent (e.g. a LangGraph or AutoGen controller) to delegate tasks to your Hologram agents automatically
Your agents to be discoverable in an agent marketplace or multi-agent pipeline
Agent chaining — your GitHub agent spawning your Wise agent as a subtask

In that scenario, you'd publish an Agent Card (a JSON descriptor at a well-known URL like /.well-known/agent.json) and implement an A2A task endpoint. Your existing DID/VC identity layer is actually a strong foundation for the A2A auth story — most A2A implementations use bearer tokens, but DIDs are supported and give you stronger identity guarantees.

Practical recommendation
For now, build your control interface as:

A REST admin API on your NestJS app (protected by an admin credential) for management operations
A WebSocket chat endpoint as an alternative channel alongside DIDComm for human interaction
Hold off on A2A until you have a concrete use case where another agent needs to call yours — then the Agent Card + task endpoint is a small addition on top of what you'd already have

This gives you full control without the overhead of A2A, and leaves the door open for it later.You said: so there is no standard protocol for building human interfaces that connect to agentsso there is no standard protocol for building human interfaces that connect to agentsMay 23Claude responded: Actually, there is — and it's very relevant to you.Thinking about standardization gaps in human-agent interface designThinking about standardization gaps in human-agent interface designActually, there is — and it's very relevant to you. It's called AG-UI.

AG-UI — Agent-User Interaction Protocol
Developed by CopilotKit and released in early 2025, AG-UI is an open protocol for bidirectional, event-driven communication between AI agents and frontend applications. It defines a standard event stream format that agents use to push state updates, streaming text, tool call results, and UI data to the interface. MindStudio
AG-UI is open and lightweight, built around ~16 standard event types. Agent backends emit these events over any transport — SSE, WebSockets, or webhooks — and accept a few simple AG-UI-compatible inputs. It ships with a reference HTTP implementation and default connector to help teams get started fast. GitHub
The event types cover exactly what a human-facing agent interface needs:

Text streaming — token-by-token response delivery
Tool call events — when the agent invokes a tool and when results return
State sync events — agent state the frontend can render
Human-in-the-loop — interrupts where the UI waits for human approval before the agent proceeds

AG-UI has been integrated by major framework and cloud vendors including Microsoft, Google, Amazon, Oracle, and open-source agent frameworks such as LangGraph, CrewAI, Mastra, Pydantic AI, and Agno. AI Wiki

The Complete Protocol Stack
This fills in the picture from our earlier conversation:
ProtocolConnectsYour statusMCPAgent → Tools✅ Already using as clientA2AAgent ↔ Agent❌ Not yetAG-UIAgent ↔ Human UI❌ Not yet — currently DIDComm only
DIDComm is essentially doing what AG-UI is designed for, but in a decentralized identity-first way rather than a web-native way. The trade-off: DIDComm gives you strong identity and verifiable credentials; AG-UI gives you broad ecosystem compatibility and a rich streaming UI.

What this means for your project
The practical path forward would be to add an AG-UI endpoint to your NestJS agent as a second channel alongside DIDComm:

DIDComm remains for users who need verifiable credential auth and the full Hologram/Verana identity stack
AG-UI becomes the channel for web UIs, admin dashboards, developer tools, and any client that doesn't need DIDComm

Your CoreService state machine already has the right structure — you'd map its states and events to AG-UI's event types. The streaming gaps I mentioned in the repo analysis would also get solved naturally by implementing AG-UI.
One worth noting: the most substantive critique of AG-UI from developers is that the small core protocol relies on CUSTOM events to express anything beyond the canonical features, which risks recreating the very fragmentation it was intended to solve. So it's not perfect — but it's currently the closest thing to a standard for this layer, with real industry backing. AI WikiYou said: and I can bootstrap AG-UI after a DIDComm authenticationand I can bootstrap AG-UI after a DIDComm authenticationMay 23Claude responded: Yes — and it's actually a very clean architecture.Validated layered architecture combining DIDComm authentication with AG-UI session bootstrappingValidated layered architecture combining DIDComm authentication with AG-UI session bootstrappingYes — and it's actually a very clean architecture. The two protocols are orthogonal: DIDComm handles identity, AG-UI handles communication. They don't overlap.
The flow would look like this:
1. User opens your web UI
2. UI initiates DIDComm connection (QR code, deep link, etc.)
3. User presents Verifiable Credential via Hologram wallet
4. Your VS Agent verifies the VC, extracts identity + roles
5. Your backend issues a short-lived token (JWT) bound to the DID
6. UI opens an AG-UI SSE/WebSocket connection, passing the JWT
7. AG-UI session starts — already authenticated, roles already resolved
The key insight is that the JWT becomes the bridge between the two worlds. It carries everything DIDComm established (DID, roles, credential claims) into the AG-UI session, so your existing RBAC and tool filtering logic works unchanged.
In your NestJS app this maps very naturally:
typescript// Step 5: after DIDComm VC verification succeeds in CoreService
async onCredentialVerified(connectionId: string, claims: CredentialClaims) {
  const token = this.jwtService.sign({
    did: claims.did,
    roles: claims.roles,
    identity: claims.userIdentityAttribute,
    connectionId,           // keeps the DIDComm session linked
  }, { expiresIn: '1h' });

  // Send token back to user over DIDComm (e.g. as a contextual menu action URL)
  await this.vsAgent.sendMessage(connectionId, {
    type: 'auth-complete',
    webUiUrl: `https://your-ui.com/chat?token=${token}`
  });
}

// Step 6: AG-UI endpoint, guarded by the JWT
@Get('/agent/stream')
@UseGuards(JwtAuthGuard)
async stream(@Req() req, @Res() res) {
  const { did, roles, connectionId } = req.user;
  // bootstrap AG-UI session with identity already resolved
  await this.agUiService.startSession(res, { did, roles, connectionId });
}

Why this is a strong pattern
Security posture is excellent. The hard part of identity (cryptographic VC verification, DID resolution) is done by DIDComm before AG-UI even opens. The AG-UI session inherits a verified identity rather than relying on username/password or OAuth.
Your existing RBAC works as-is. The JWT carries the same role claims your RbacService already reads. No changes needed to tool filtering or approval workflows.
You keep DIDComm's unique value. Most AG-UI implementations have weak identity — they use social login or API keys. Yours would have cryptographically verified, self-sovereign identity. That's a genuine differentiator if you're building for enterprise or regulated contexts.
The DIDComm session stays live in parallel. Since connectionId is in the JWT, your backend can still send DIDComm notifications (approval requests, alerts) to the Hologram wallet while the user is chatting in the web UI. Both channels coexist.

One thing to design carefully
The token handoff moment — how the JWT gets from your backend to the browser. A few options:

DIDComm message contains a one-time URL with the token (simplest, but the token is in the URL)
DIDComm message triggers the wallet to open a deep link, which exchanges a short-lived code for the JWT (cleaner)
The web UI polls a /auth/status/:nonce endpoint until DIDComm auth completes, then receives the JWT (best UX — no redirect)

The third pattern (nonce polling) is the most seamless: the user scans a QR code in the web UI, the DIDComm flow happens in their wallet, and the web UI automatically transitions into the AG-UI chat session when auth completes — no redirect, no copy-pasting tokens.You said: are they open source AG-UI human interfacesare they open source AG-UI human interfacesMay 23Claude responded: Yes, there are a few, at different levels of abstraction.Assembled sufficient knowledge to address open source AG-UI interfaces comprehensivelyAssembled sufficient knowledge to address open source AG-UI interfaces comprehensivelyYes, there are a few, at different levels of abstraction. Here's the landscape:

1. CopilotKit — the reference implementation
(React/Angular, ~30k GitHub stars, MIT)
CopilotKit is an open-source frontend framework for building AI copilots, autonomous agents, and generative UI within React and Angular applications. As the creator of the AG-UI protocol, it provides a comprehensive toolkit covering chat interfaces, task orchestration, context awareness, and RAG integration. It's been adopted by Google, LangChain, AWS, and Microsoft. Jimmy Song
It gives you pre-built <CopilotChat> components, streaming, tool call rendering, human-in-the-loop interrupts, and shared state between agent and UI — all out of the box. The most complete AG-UI frontend available. The main downside: it's React-first and somewhat opinionated. If you embed it, you're adopting their architecture.

2. assistant-ui
(React, composable headless components)
React-only composable libraries like assistant-ui offer great developer experience but come with framework lock-in. They're well-suited for greenfield projects but less ideal for brownfield products with existing agent infrastructure. Medium
More lightweight than CopilotKit — just UI primitives you wire up yourself. Good if you want full control over appearance without the full CopilotKit runtime.

3. Open WebUI
(Python/Svelte, ~70k+ stars, MIT)
The most popular self-hosted chat UI overall, but AG-UI support is still in discussion. There's an open request to implement AG-UI in Open WebUI, with community consensus that "for every low-hanging fruit use case, you'd have to build a separate frontend" — and that having major frontends and agentic backends support AG-UI would allow easy connection of client agents to frontends, enabling richer interactions. Not there yet natively, but worth watching. GitHub

4. Chainlit
(Python-first, ~11k stars)
Was the go-to for Python agent developers wanting a quick polished chat UI. The original Chainlit team stepped back from active development in May 2025, and community maintainers have picked it up, but the trajectory is uncertain. Probably not the right bet for a new project. Medium

What this means for your project
Realistically you have two paths:
Path A — Use CopilotKit as your frontend, implement an AG-UI endpoint in your NestJS agent. You get streaming, tool call UI, and human-in-the-loop for free. The DIDComm auth bootstraps the session as we discussed, and CopilotKit takes over from there. Fastest to working UI.
Path B — Build your own thin AG-UI client using the raw ag-ui-protocol TypeScript SDK and wire it to whatever UI framework you prefer. AG-UI's flexible middleware layer works with any event transport — SSE, WebSockets, or webhooks — so you're not locked to any frontend framework. More work, but you keep full control and it fits naturally into your existing Hologram/Verana design language. GitHub
Given that your agents already have sophisticated RBAC, approval workflows, and per-user MCP config flows, Path B is probably the better long-term fit — those features deserve a UI that's designed around them rather than bolted onto a generic chat component. But Path A is a much faster way to get something working to validate the DIDComm → AG-UI handoff pattern.You said: how about mobile appshow about mobile appsMay 23Claude responded: The honest answer is: AG-UI has a gap here.Investigated mobile SDK availability and synthesized findingsInvestigated mobile SDK availability and synthesized findingsThe honest answer is: AG-UI has a gap here. Here's the full picture:

AG-UI's mobile status
CopilotKit currently offers first-party React and Angular AG-UI clients, with community clients emerging across Golang, Rust, Java, and more. But React Native is not in that list yet. CopilotKit
There's an open GitHub issue requesting a dedicated React Native client for AG-UI, noting that it currently provides client implementations for web and CLI environments only, with no dedicated mobile client despite increasing demand for integrating AI agents into mobile applications. GitHub
So the protocol itself is transport-agnostic (SSE/WebSocket works on mobile), but there's no first-class mobile SDK or UI component library for it yet. You'd be building against the raw protocol.

Your practical options for mobile
Option A — React Native (closest to AG-UI web path)
Since your web frontend would likely use CopilotKit/AG-UI with React, React Native shares the same language, tooling, and mental model. You'd consume the raw AG-UI SSE stream yourself since there's no React Native client yet — but the protocol is simple enough (~16 JSON event types over SSE) that building a thin client isn't a huge lift. The DIDComm → JWT → AG-UI auth pattern we discussed works identically.
Option B — Flutter
SDKs for AG-UI are active or in development for Kotlin, Go, Dart, Java, and Rust. Dart (Flutter's language) is on that list, meaning a Flutter AG-UI client is closer than React Native. Flutter also gives you pixel-perfect UI consistency across iOS and Android, which matters for an agent control interface. DataCamp
Option C — Your existing Hologram app
Worth asking: does the Hologram wallet app already give users mobile access to your agents via DIDComm? If so, mobile is already solved for the DIDComm channel. The web UI gap is really about operators and developers, not necessarily end users.

The bigger picture for your architecture
Given that you have both a web and mobile surface to consider, here's how the layers stack up:
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  Hologram wallet (mobile)  │  Web UI         │
│  DIDComm channel           │  AG-UI channel  │
└───────────────────┬────────┴──────┬──────────┘
                    │    JWT bridge  │
              ┌─────▼───────────────▼──────┐
              │   hologram-ai-agent (NestJS) │
              │   CoreService / RBAC / MCP   │
              └──────────────────────────────┘
Mobile users who need strong verifiable identity → Hologram wallet (DIDComm, already works)

Web users / operators / developers → AG-UI web interface (to build)

Mobile users who want a lighter native experience → React Native or Flutter consuming the AG-UI SSE endpoint directly (future)
The cleanest short-term path is to not build a custom mobile app yet — let the Hologram wallet cover mobile DIDComm use cases, build the web AG-UI interface first, and then a mobile AG-UI client becomes straightforward once the protocol is properly established on the web. The JWT bridge design is the same regardless of which mobile framework you eventually pick.You said: I want to rebuild a clean spec for hologram-ai-agent.I want to rebuild a clean spec for hologram-ai-agent.first, read this issue and its comments (some comments are out of scope) https://github.com/2060-io/hologram-ai-agent/issues/84May 23Claude responded: I can see the main issue body, but the comments didn't load (it fetched a fragment endpoint).Grappled with incomplete content retrieval and explored alternative fetching strategiesGrappled with incomplete content retrieval and explored alternative fetching strategiesI can see the main issue body, but the comments didn't load (it fetched a fragment endpoint). Let me get them.Encountered inaccessible comments, assessed available issue content thoroughlyEncountered inaccessible comments, assessed available issue content thoroughlyI can read the full issue body, but GitHub's fragment rendering isn't loading the comments for unauthenticated fetches. The issue body itself is very thorough though. Let me tell you what I've absorbed and you can paste any comments you want included.

What I've read from issue #84
This is a well-written architecture spec authored by mjfelis. Here's my digest:
The core problem: the current memory model is { role, content: string } — a plain text pipe. Everything rich gets thrown away: generated images, received media, tool call traces, message state events, emoji reactions, and anything beyond the active N-message window. Each session is also a complete silo.
The 16 design goals cover a lot of ground, which I'd group into four themes:
Theme 1 — Rich memory model (goals 1, 2, 3, 4)

Replace the flat string model with structured MessageEntry objects that carry typed attachments (images with AES key + digest, voice transcriptions, file metadata, credential summaries). Text-first — never binary. Token-conscious.
Theme 2 — Persistence, immutability, and audit (goals 6, 10, 12, 13)

Long-term Postgres storage, SHA-256 digests on all external references, periodic batch anchoring to the Verana ledger via store-digest, soft-delete retention with a 1-year default, and auditor role with unrestricted read access.
Theme 3 — Cross-session awareness and RBAC (goals 7, 11, 16)

Visibility tiers (private, shared, global) on messages, RBAC-gated cross-session queries, credential presentations as first-class persistent data (re-verified on each use), and durable principal preferences.
Theme 4 — Richer interaction model (goals 8, 9, 14, 15)

LLM-controlled per-message reactionPolicy for emoji feedback, generalized multi-party approval workflows (count/percentage/unanimous), device-level auth challenges (biometric, face match, NFC), and a versioned system prompt add-on.
Open questions still unresolved: token budget with richer messages, MinIO URL expiration strategy, token-based vs count-based window, pgvector vs ILIKE for search, cross-session identity linking across reconnections, and GDPR implications of cross-session access.

The comments would be valuable — could you paste the ones you consider in-scope here? Once I have them, I'll draft the clean spec.You said: Comments below.Hey dear contributors,

Let me bring some answers about the cross-session privacy and related GDPR implications, as I believe the GDPR topic is broader than crypto-erasure.

The main open question is therefore not only:
"How do we erase data from an immutable audit trail?"
It is also:
"Under which cpastedComments below. Pay attention that some comments might be out of scope or unuseful.[@mjfelis](https://github.com/mjfelis) First I think for the token budget a way to store it would probably be interesting to write it as plain text in files written by the LLM itself, like it does for example, in openclaw. So it is scalable, for example, if we store them as it is and write or send thousands of messages, it could eventually get too long as a context for the agent to remember correctly without skipping parts. So I guess it is better if with a tool call, the language model is able to edit its own knowledge about the conversation. We just have to be careful that the user itself is not able to edit this memory because it would result in bad security things… Of course, this would require a model that is able to describe images because as the model receives files, he must be able to understand them in order to know what does it corresponds in its memory. But close to all models to this day are able to do that, open or closed source.
As for the cross session privacy after research, the GDPR raises a few things we'd probably need to look out for. The main one I see is the right to erasure, because goal [#10](https://github.com/2060-io/hologram-ai-agent/pull/10) makes the data immutable once it's anchored on Verana, but users can still ask for their data to be deleted. From what I read, the cleanest way around this is crypto-erasure: encrypt each message with its own key (we already do it for media) and just destroy the key on erasure. the plaintext becomes unreadable but the digest stays valid, so we don't touch the ledger. That’s my point of view let me know what y’all think.Hey everyone, I have a couple of perspectives about using the memory with the DB vector.
Token budget + Memory window + Search: I think a vector storage approach makes sense. Embeddings capture semantic meaning and allow similarity-based searches, which is the foundation of RAG architectures. A token-based window is better than message count with richer messages. And pgvector embeddings from the start avoid rework. ILIKE doesn't cover semantic searches which are key to retrieving relevant context.
Image descriptions: Storing a brief description is efficient. If we reprocess each time someone asks about an image, we waste tokens unnecessarily.
Image generation: Event-driven makes sense for potentially blocking processes. Respond quickly while processing in the background, but shouldn't keep accepting messages during generation; otherwise, we lose the time point where it occurred. Better to mark as "generating" and pause input until complete.
MinIO: Store references (bucket/key) in the database, generate presigned URLs on demand. Handles expiration well.
GDPR: Agree with crypto-erasure. Encrypt each message with its own key and destroy the key on erasure. Plaintext becomes unreadable but the digest stays valid without touching the ledger.Good point about the RAG [@lotharking](https://github.com/lotharking) but do you think it wouldn't be possible to use both at the same time ? Use short LLM descriptions as global context and vectors to store a bigger amount of info ?For sure, a good example is [text splitters](https://blog.codegpt.co/text-splitters-experience-smart-text-division-with-langchain-9bb280160f7c). They are used to break text into smaller chunks, making it easier to store and retrieve information in a vector database.Show moreMay 23Claude responded: I now have the full picture — the issue body plus four comments.Synthesized comments into architectural decisions for clean specification rebuildSynthesized comments into architectural decisions for clean specification rebuildI now have the full picture — the issue body plus four comments. Let me sort what's in-scope before building the spec.
In-scope and decision-bearing:
The GDPR deep-dive comment is the most important. It substantially reframes design goal 7: the real question isn't just "how to erase from an immutable trail" but "under what conditions may an agent remember/retrieve/reuse/expose personal data across sessions." Key mandates: privacy scopes on every entry, access control before retrieval (not filtering after the LLM sees data), purpose limitation, data minimization, erasure that cascades to derived data (summaries, embeddings, working memory) via a lineage graph, crypto-erasure over ciphertext, legal-hold states, and a memory-access audit log.
mjfelis adds: LLM self-editing working memory written as plain-text files via tool calls (MemGPT/Letta-style), with the hard rule that the principal must never be able to edit it; and crypto-erasure (per-message key, destroy on erasure).
lotharking resolves several open questions directly: pgvector from the start (not ILIKE), token-based window (not message count), store brief image descriptions, event-driven image generation that pauses input during generation, and MinIO bucket/key refs with on-demand presigned URLs.
The hybrid follow-up (short descriptions as global context + vectors for depth, with text splitters) is in-scope and sensible.
Low-signal / out-of-scope: the text-splitters link is generic confirmation only — I'll fold the conclusion in without dwelling on it.
Let me check the skill for the document format, then build the clean spec.Decided to compose markdown specification directly without delayDecided to compose markdown specification directly without delayNo markdown skill exists, so I'll write the spec directly. This is a developer spec for a GitHub repo, so clean markdown is the right format. Building it now.Claude's response was interrupted.Try againYou said: wait.wait. Before writing this v2 spec for hologram-ai-agent, let's align. First show me a list of features that will be included in this spec v2.May 23Claude responded: Good call.Organized features thematically, resolved decisions, flagged open itemsOrganized features thematically, resolved decisions, flagged open itemsGood call. Here's the proposed feature set for spec v2, organized into coherent areas. Decisions the comments resolved are marked [resolved]; genuinely open items are flagged at the end.
1. Rich memory model
Replaces the flat { role, content: string } with structured, typed MessageEntry objects.

Typed attachments: generated images, principal-sent media, voice notes, video, files, credential presentations — each storing text representation + MinIO bucket/key ref + AES key + SHA-256 digest, never binary
Tool-call traces persisted (name, args, result — truncated/summarized)
Outgoing rich messages persisted (text, media, menus, invitations)
Voice notes recorded as transcription + sourceType: 'voice'
Brief LLM-generated image descriptions stored once, not reprocessed [resolved: lotharking]

2. Tiered memory & retrieval

Working memory — LLM self-edits a compact, plain-text knowledge file via tool calls (MemGPT/Letta-style); principal must never be able to edit it [resolved: mjfelis]
Active context window — token-based, not message-count [resolved: lotharking]
Long-term store — Postgres, all entries, survives beyond the window
Semantic index — pgvector embeddings from the start (not ILIKE) [resolved: lotharking]
Hybrid retrieval — short descriptions as ambient context + vector search for depth [resolved: follow-up]
Summarization to compress old turns

3. Privacy & GDPR architecture (the big expansion of original goal 7)

Two orthogonal axes on every entry: visibility scope (session-private, principal-private, organization-shared, partner-shared, public) and lifecycle state (active, archived, expired, legal-hold, crypto-erased, deleted)
Purpose tag per entry, with purpose-limitation enforcement on cross-session reuse
Policy-based retrieval: authorization before retrieval, never filtering after the LLM has seen data [resolved: GDPR comment]
Data minimization — retrieval scoped by tenant/org/principal/role/visibility/purpose/retention; summaries preferred over raw
Erasure lineage graph — erasing source cascades to derived data (summaries, embeddings, working-memory notes, tool args, credential claims, approval records)
Crypto-erasure — per-entry key, digests anchored over ciphertext, destroy key on erasure, keep anchor intact [resolved: all three]
Memory-access audit log — who/which agent/which entries/which sessions/what purpose/what policy/shown-to-LLM/influenced-a-tool-call

4. RBAC & cross-session access

Fully configurable roles in the agent-pack (unlimited custom roles)
Role × visibility access matrix; auditor role with unrestricted read
Cross-session awareness gated by the policy layer above

5. Interaction features

Reaction intelligence — LLM sets per-message reactionPolicy (notify / historize / conditional-by-emoji)
Message state updates — wire up the currently no-op viewed/received handler
Generalized approval workflow — count / N-distinct / percentage / unanimous, optional veto-on-refusal, eligibility by role + connection type, persisted decisions
Device auth challenges — biometric/PIN, face-match with liveness, NFC document read; system-enforced (not LLM-decided), outcome persisted
Credential presentations — first-class persistent data, re-verified on each use (revocation can change)
Principal preferences — durable cross-session, auto-loaded each turn

6. Integrity & audit

SHA-256 reference digests on all external objects
Periodic batch anchoring to Verana ledger via store-digest
Retention tiers with soft-delete (archive), digest anchors kept forever

7. Platform plumbing

System prompt add-on — additive, feature-gated, versioned, <500 tokens
Event-driven image generation — respond fast, generate in background, mark generating and pause input until complete [resolved: lotharking]
Clean ingestion pipeline (incoming/outgoing) replacing the string-extraction path
Provider-agnostic (text-only and multimodal LLMs)


Still genuinely open (would flag in spec, not silently decide)

Connection types — does v2 commit to the verifiable-service vs verifiable-user-agent distinction from the terminology, and does it affect memory/RBAC beyond approval eligibility?
Cross-session identity linking — link sessions via userIdentity from the credential? This is the linchpin for principal-private scope working at all.
Tenant/organization model — the GDPR comment assumes org/partner scopes exist. Is multi-tenancy in scope for v2, or single-tenant with org as config?
Working memory vs. summarization overlap — both compress history. One mechanism or two? Worth deciding before writing.
AG-UI / non-DIDComm channel — out of scope for this spec, or a forward-compat note?


A few things worth your call before I write:

Scope boundary — is this spec memory + privacy + interaction only (i.e., issue #84's remit), or should it also fold in the broader framework rebuild we discussed earlier (AG-UI channel, A2A)? I'd lean toward keeping v2 tight to #84 and noting the channel work as out-of-scope.
Anything above you'd cut from v2 to keep it shippable, versus park for v3?

Want me to resolve the five open items with recommended defaults, or leave them as explicit open questions in the spec?You said: explain, I do not understand your commentexplain, I do not understand your commentprobably for human sessions, but if 2 agents connects together using a2a they would first authenticate using  [Verifiable Trust](https://verana-labs.github.io/verifiable-trust-spec/)  so userIdentity must be something else (maybe the ECS-Org or ECS-Persona)Single tenant, with Org or Persona as configexplainAG-UI: must be included in this specThen your last comments:Scope boundary: fold in the broader framework rebuild we discussed earlier (AG-UI channel, A2A)don't limit to a specific implementation libraries/framework for writing this spec. It's OK if we then rebuild the implementation from scratch. What we want is a clean specShow moreMay 23Claude responded: Good, this clarifies a lot.Good, this clarifies a lot. Let me explain the two items you asked about, then confirm the reframed scope.
Re #1 — Connection types
I wasn't proposing anything new here — I was asking whether v2 commits to the verifiable-service vs verifiable-user-agent distinction that's already defined in the issue's terminology table, and whether that distinction affects anything beyond approval eligibility.
But your answer to #2 actually resolves this. The connection type isn't just a label — it determines how identity is established, and therefore what userIdentity even means:

Verifiable User Agent (human via wallet, did:peer:) → identity comes from credentials presented over DIDComm → userIdentity is a credential claim
Verifiable Service (agent/bot via resolvable DID, often over A2A) → identity comes from Verifiable Trust verification → userIdentity is the ECS-Org or ECS-Persona identifier, not a DIDComm-presented claim

So connection type is foundational: it's the discriminator that tells the system which identity-resolution path to use. That's exactly what I'll build the identity model around.
Re #4 — Working memory vs. summarization overlap
Both of these compress old conversation, so I wanted to flag the risk of building two overlapping mechanisms. The distinction:

Summarization is passive and mechanical: when the token window fills, the system automatically condenses the oldest N turns into a shorter recap. The LLM doesn't choose what's kept — an algorithm does. It's lossy and chronological.
Working memory (the MemGPT/Letta idea from mjfelis) is active and curated: the LLM deliberately writes durable facts to a plain-text scratchpad via a tool call ("user prefers French," "owner approved transfer #42"). It's a decision, not a byproduct.

The overlap: both end up holding "the important older stuff." If you build both naïvely, a fact could live in three places (raw history, a summary, and working memory) — which is a GDPR nightmare, because erasure now has to chase the same personal data through three derived copies.
My recommendation, which I'll write into the spec unless you object: working memory is the single curated long-term layer; summarization is demoted to a transient, regenerable compression of the active window only (never persisted as an independent record). That keeps the lineage graph clean — working memory entries are first-class lineage nodes; window summaries are throwaway and rebuilt on demand, so they never become an orphaned copy of erased data.

Reframed scope — confirming before I write
This is now bigger than issue #84. It's a clean architecture spec for the whole agent, framework-agnostic (no LangChain/NestJS/specific-library assumptions — those become implementation choices, not spec). Structure I'm planning:

Identity & connection model — principals, connection types, the two identity-resolution paths (DIDComm credentials vs Verifiable Trust ECS-Org/ECS-Persona), single-tenant with Org/Persona as config
Channel layer — DIDComm, AG-UI (human UIs, web/mobile), and A2A (agent-to-agent) as peer ingress/egress channels over a common core, with the JWT-bridge / session-bootstrap pattern unified across them
Memory model — rich typed entries, tiered memory (working / window / long-term / semantic), retrieval
Privacy & GDPR architecture — scopes, purpose, policy-before-retrieval, minimization, crypto-erasure, lineage, legal hold, retention, access audit
RBAC & cross-session access
Interaction features — reactions, approvals, auth challenges, credentials, preferences, message state
Integrity & audit — digests, Verana anchoring
Platform plumbing — system prompt add-on, event-driven media, ingestion pipeline
Open questions + phased rollout

Two checks before I write:

Channels as first-class peers. I'm treating DIDComm, AG-UI, and A2A as three channels into one core, where the core is channel-agnostic (it deals in principals, sessions, and messages — not transports). Does that match your mental model, or do you see DIDComm as the substrate that the others ride on top of?
A2A + Verifiable Trust. When two agents connect via A2A, you said they authenticate via Verifiable Trust first. Is A2A's own auth (Agent Cards / bearer) layered on top of Verifiable Trust, or does Verifiable Trust replace A2A's native auth entirely? This affects how I model the A2A channel's identity path.

Once you answer those two, I'll write it.You said: Channels as first-class peers => explain more into detailsChannels as first-class peers => explain more into detailsMay 23Claude responded: Sure.Sure. This is an architectural decision about where the transport lives relative to the agent's brain — and it has real consequences for the rest of the spec. Let me lay out the two models concretely.
The question
Your agent currently has exactly one way in: DIDComm, via the VS Agent. We're adding AG-UI (human web/mobile UIs) and A2A (other agents). The question is how these three relate to each other in the architecture.
Model A — DIDComm as substrate (everything rides on it)
        ┌─────────────┐   ┌─────────────┐
        │   AG-UI UI  │   │  A2A peer   │
        └──────┬──────┘   └──────┬──────┘
               │ tunnels through │
               ▼                 ▼
        ┌──────────────────────────────┐
        │       DIDComm (VS Agent)      │  ← the one true transport
        └───────────────┬──────────────┘
                        ▼
        ┌──────────────────────────────┐
        │           Agent Core          │
        └──────────────────────────────┘
Here DIDComm is privileged. AG-UI and A2A are adapters that ultimately become DIDComm connections — an AG-UI web session would, under the hood, establish a DIDComm connection and the UI is just a renderer on top of it. Everything in the core is expressed as DIDComm primitives (connectionId, DIDComm message types).
This is essentially what you have today, extended.
Model B — Channels as first-class peers (a thin core, three equal adapters)
   ┌──────────┐    ┌──────────┐    ┌──────────┐
   │ DIDComm  │    │  AG-UI   │    │   A2A    │   ← three peer channels
   │ adapter  │    │ adapter  │    │ adapter  │
   └────┬─────┘    └────┬─────┘    └────┬─────┘
        │               │               │
        └───────────────┼───────────────┘
                        ▼
        ┌──────────────────────────────────┐
        │   Channel-agnostic Agent Core     │
        │   speaks only:                    │
        │   • Principal                     │
        │   • Session                       │
        │   • MessageEntry (canonical)      │
        │   • capability events             │
        └──────────────────────────────────┘
Here no channel is privileged. The core deals only in abstract concepts — Principal, Session, canonical MessageEntry — and knows nothing about transports. Each channel is an adapter responsible for two translations:

Inbound: transport-specific message → canonical MessageEntry
Outbound: canonical agent action → transport-specific rendering

DIDComm becomes just one adapter among three, not the foundation.
Why this distinction matters concretely
The difference shows up everywhere in the spec. A few examples:
Identity resolution. In Model B, the connection type you described (verifiable-user-agent vs verifiable-service) maps cleanly: the DIDComm adapter resolves identity via presented credentials; the A2A adapter resolves identity via Verifiable Trust → ECS-Org/ECS-Persona; the AG-UI adapter resolves identity via the bootstrap token minted after one of the other two authenticated. The core just receives a resolved Principal and doesn't care which path produced it. In Model A you'd be forcing the A2A and AG-UI identity paths to masquerade as DIDComm credentials, which is awkward and lossy.
Capability rendering. Your agent emits rich actions — menus, approval requests, auth challenges, reactions. Each channel renders these differently:
Core capabilityDIDCommAG-UIA2AContextual menuMenuDisplayMessageAG-UI UI eventsstructured task optionsApproval requestmenu badgehuman-in-the-loop eventtask input-required stateAuth challenge (biometric/NFC)DIDComm challenge msgnot supported → must reject/degradenot supportedText responseTextMessageTEXT_MESSAGE_* SSE eventsA2A message
In Model B the core emits one abstract "request approval" event, and each adapter decides how to render it — or declares it can't (an A2A peer has no biometric sensor, so the auth-challenge capability is simply unavailable on that channel). That negotiation is clean. In Model A, everything is a DIDComm message and the non-DIDComm channels have to reverse-engineer intent from DIDComm types.
Reactions & message state. Emoji reactions and viewed/received events are DIDComm-native concepts. AG-UI has its own state-sync events; A2A largely doesn't have reactions at all. Model B lets the core define an abstract "feedback signal" that each channel maps to (or omits). Model A leaks DIDComm semantics into channels that don't have them.
The cost
Model B isn't free. It requires defining the canonical MessageEntry and capability event vocabulary precisely enough that all three channels can map to and from it — that's real design work, and it's the heart of what makes the spec clean. Model A is less upfront work but bakes DIDComm assumptions so deep that the AG-UI and A2A channels are permanently second-class.
My recommendation
Model B, for three reasons that are specific to your situation:

You explicitly want a clean, framework-agnostic spec that you may reimplement from scratch — Model B is that cleanliness, because the core has no transport dependency.
Your identity model already has three genuinely different auth paths (DIDComm credentials, Verifiable Trust for agents, bootstrap token for UIs). Model B accommodates that natively; Model A fights it.
The capability-negotiation table above (which channels support auth challenges, reactions, etc.) is something you need anyway — Model B makes it a first-class concept instead of a pile of special cases.

The one thing I'd preserve from Model A's instinct: DIDComm remains the identity and trust anchor even in Model B. AG-UI sessions still bootstrap from a DIDComm/Verifiable-Trust authentication — it's just that once a Principal is resolved, the channel it arrived on is irrelevant to the core. So DIDComm is privileged for trust establishment, but not for transport. That's the nuance, and I think it's exactly the model that fits what you're building.
Does Model B match your intent? And does that "DIDComm anchors trust, but isn't the transport substrate" nuance sound right to you?You said: Does Model B match your intent?Does Model B match your intent? And does that "DIDComm anchors trust, but isn't the transport substrate" nuance sound right to you?=> Yes, I think that probably a human could be connected through DIDComm AND AG-UI at the same time, and in case of authentication challange, it could be sent to a DIDComm session they have in their mobile, for example. For services using a2a, the DIDComm channel can be used for credential exchanges, as a2a doesn't support it. Finally I think we should use DIDComm for:initial authentication and bootstrap of AG-UI and A2Acredential exchangehuman in the loop actions that requires Auth challenge.
Do you agree?May 23Claude responded: Yes, I agree — and what you've just described is actually a sharper model than "DIDComm anchors trust.Yes, I agree — and what you've just described is actually a sharper model than "DIDComm anchors trust." You're defining DIDComm as a capability provider, not just a bootstrap step. Let me reflect it back precisely, because there's an important consequence.
What you're really saying
DIDComm isn't only the trust anchor at connection time — it's the secure side-channel for capabilities that AG-UI and A2A structurally cannot provide. Three of them:

Initial authentication & bootstrap — establishes the Principal, then hands AG-UI/A2A a resolved session
Credential exchange — the verifiable-credential request/presentation flow (A2A has no concept of this; AG-UI has no wallet)
Auth challenges — biometric, face-match, NFC — these need a device with sensors, i.e. the mobile wallet

The unifying thread: all three require a trusted, wallet-bound device. AG-UI is a rendering surface (a browser tab); A2A is a machine peer. Neither has a wallet, sensors, or credential storage. DIDComm — via the Hologram mobile wallet — is the only channel that does.
The key consequence: a Principal can hold multiple concurrent channels
This is the important part of your insight. A human isn't "a DIDComm session" or "an AG-UI session" — they're one Principal with one or more attached channels, and capabilities route to whichever channel can serve them.
   Principal (resolved identity, roles)
   ├── AG-UI channel    ← active conversation (fast, rich UI)
   └── DIDComm channel  ← same person's mobile wallet (trust + sensors)
So the canonical flow for your example:
1. Human chats via AG-UI web UI  (conversation channel)
2. Agent needs to authorize a transfer → auth challenge required
3. Core emits: capability request "auth-challenge: biometric"
4. Channel router: AG-UI cannot serve this → route to the
   Principal's bound DIDComm channel (mobile wallet)
5. Wallet does biometric unlock → result returns over DIDComm
6. Core receives outcome → conversation continues in AG-UI
The human experiences one continuous session; under the hood two channels cooperated, each doing what it's good at.
What this requires in the spec
This adds a concept I'll need to make first-class: channel binding to a Principal. Specifically:

A Principal has a set of bound channels, each with a type and a capability profile
The DIDComm channel is marked as the Principal's trust/sensor channel — the target for credential exchange and auth challenges, regardless of which channel the conversation is happening on
The channel router in the core, when emitting a capability event, asks "which bound channel can serve this?" and routes accordingly — falling back or degrading if none can
Binding two channels to one Principal needs a linking mechanism — which connects directly to your open question #2 (cross-session identity): the AG-UI session's bootstrap token carries the identity established over DIDComm, so the core knows they're the same Principal

So the capability negotiation table from before gets a routing dimension:
CapabilityPreferred channelIf conversation is on AG-UI/A2AText / menus / conversationthe active channelserved in placeCredential exchangeDIDComm onlyrouted to bound DIDComm channelAuth challenge (biometric/NFC/face)DIDComm onlyrouted to bound DIDComm channelApproval (non-sensor)any channelserved in place, or notified cross-channel
One refinement to confirm
For the A2A case you described — "DIDComm can be used for credential exchanges since A2A doesn't support it" — this works only if the A2A peer also has a DIDComm endpoint to bind to. For a service agent that's reasonable (it has a resolvable DID, so it can do DIDComm). So the model holds: an A2A-connected service is a Principal whose conversation channel is A2A but whose credential-exchange channel is DIDComm — exactly parallel to the human's AG-UI + DIDComm pairing.
That symmetry is elegant and I'll build the spec around it: conversation channel and capability channel are separable, and DIDComm is the universal capability channel for trust-bound operations.
So, fully agreed. One thing to pin down before I write:
When a Principal has no bound DIDComm channel (e.g. an A2A peer that genuinely has no DIDComm endpoint, or a future AG-UI-only user), and a capability requires it — should the core (a) hard-fail the action, (b) degrade (skip the challenge, log that it was unmet), or (c) make it agent-pack-configurable per action? My instinct is (c) with a safe default of (a), but this is a policy call you should own.You said: Thinking about your question, if I understand properly, there are 2 ways for establishing trust for a2a or AG-UI:Thinking about your question, if I understand properly, there are 2 ways for establishing trust for a2a or AG-UI:first DIDComm: most suitable for a2a. Agents authenticate themselves using Verifiable Trust and then bootstrap a2a through the secure didcomm channel.for AG-UI, we have 2 options: 
 if for creating a AG-UI session, both channels DIDComm and AG-UI are on the same device: can be either first DIDComm, then bootstrap AG-UI, or first AG-UI, then request a DIDComm authentication through the AG-UI channel to bind it to the principal.if for creating a AG-UI session, both channels DIDComm and AG-UI are on different devices, then first AG-UI, then request a DIDComm authentication (ex: QR code) through the AG-UI channel, use scans it with its mobile device, and  AG-UI channel is bound to the principal.Tell me if you agree or have another idea/concern before I continue with your questionShow moreMay 23Claude responded: I agree — your three flows are correct and cover the real cases.I agree — your three flows are correct and cover the real cases. Let me reflect them back as a single unified pattern, then raise the concerns that matter before you answer the fallback question.
Your flows generalize to one rule
All three are the same primitive in different orders: trust is always established over DIDComm; the only variable is sequencing and device topology.
A2A:                    DIDComm(VT) → bootstrap A2A
AG-UI same-device:      DIDComm → bootstrap AG-UI    OR    AG-UI → bind DIDComm
AG-UI cross-device:     AG-UI → bind DIDComm via QR scan
The unifying statement: DIDComm is always the trust-establishing event; the conversation channel (A2A/AG-UI) is bound to the Principal that DIDComm authentication produced. Direction and device are just topology.
This is clean and I can build the binding model directly on it. Two patterns fall out:

DIDComm-first ("bootstrap"): authenticate, then open the conversation channel carrying proof of the established Principal. Natural for A2A and same-device AG-UI.
Channel-first ("bind"): open the conversation channel anonymously/provisionally, then trigger a DIDComm authentication that retroactively binds it. Required for cross-device AG-UI, optional for same-device.

Both converge on the same end state: a Principal with a bound DIDComm trust/capability channel + a conversation channel.
Concerns before you continue
1. The pre-auth window (channel-first only). In the channel-first flow, the AG-UI session exists before DIDComm binding completes. What is it during that gap? My position: it's an unbound provisional session — no Principal, no roles, zero access to memory/tools/cross-session data. It can only do the one thing that advances binding (show the QR, poll for completion). This matters because it's an attack surface: an unbound session must not touch anything privacy-scoped. Worth stating as a hard invariant in the spec.
2. Binding integrity — preventing session hijack. When the QR is scanned and DIDComm auth completes, the system must bind that DIDComm authentication to that specific AG-UI session and no other. This needs a nonce: AG-UI session generates a one-time binding nonce, embeds it in the QR, the wallet echoes it back over DIDComm, and the core matches them. Without this, a leaked/photographed QR could bind an attacker's session. This is the cross-device equivalent of the JWT-bridge nonce-polling we discussed several turns back — same mechanism, now load-bearing for security.
3. Re-authentication, not just binding. Your flows cover establishing a session. But auth challenges (the biometric/NFC case) happen mid-session, repeatedly. So binding isn't one-and-done — the DIDComm channel stays bound for the session's life as the capability channel. I think your model already implies this, but the spec should distinguish bind-once (establish the Principal) from the persistent capability channel (used for every later challenge). One DIDComm binding serves both; it just isn't torn down after auth.
4. Trust establishment ≠ identity model. A2A authenticates via Verifiable Trust → ECS-Org/ECS-Persona; AG-UI (via its DIDComm binding) authenticates via presented credentials → credential claim. Both produce a Principal, but the userIdentity is sourced differently (your earlier point #2). The binding model is uniform; the identity resolution inside it is connection-type-specific. I'll keep those two layers cleanly separated in the spec so they don't bleed together.
One genuine new concern
Channel-first AG-UI implies an AG-UI inbound message type for "request DIDComm auth." In DIDComm-first, the wallet initiates. In channel-first, the AG-UI session must be able to say "I need to authenticate — here's a QR/deep-link" and then await the result. That's a capability flowing AG-UI → core → (mint binding challenge) → AG-UI-renders-QR, then DIDComm → core → bound. So the AG-UI adapter needs to render not just chat, but an auth-binding affordance. Minor, but it means AG-UI isn't purely a conversation channel — it participates in the binding handshake. Worth noting so it's not a surprise during implementation.

None of these change your model — they're invariants and edge-cases within it. So: agreed, with those four points folded in.
That still leaves my earlier question, which your flows don't resolve: when a capability needs DIDComm but the Principal has no bindable DIDComm channel (a pure A2A service with no DIDComm endpoint, or a hypothetical AG-UI user who never binds), does the action hard-fail, degrade-and-log, or stay agent-pack-configurable per action? My instinct remains configurable-per-action with a safe default of hard-fail — but it's your policy call, and it's the last thing I need before writing.You said: AgreeAgreeAgreeDIDComm is the persistent capability channel. BTW if the user opens several AG-UI sessions, they can share the same DIDComm established channel on user's mobile device.Agree
One genuine new concern => AgreeThat still leaves my earlier question, which your flows don't resolve: when a capability needs DIDComm but the Principal has no bindable DIDComm channel (a pure A2A service with no DIDComm endpoint, or a hypothetical AG-UI user who never binds), does the action hard-fail, degrade-and-log, or stay agent-pack-configurable per action? => configurable-per-action with a safe default of hard-failMay 23Claude responded: Agreed on all — and your point 3 addition is significant enough that I want to make sure I've modelled it correctly before writing, because it changes the shap…Agreed on all — and your point 3 addition is significant enough that I want to make sure I've modelled it correctly before writing, because it changes the shape of one core relationship.
The capability channel is shared across a Principal's conversation sessions
You've just said: one human, one DIDComm capability channel on their mobile, but potentially several AG-UI sessions (laptop, tablet, second browser) all riding that same DIDComm channel.
That breaks the implicit 1:1 assumption I'd been carrying. The corrected model:
            Principal (identity, roles)
                     │
        ┌────────────┴────────────┐
        │                         │
   1 capability channel      N conversation sessions
   (DIDComm, mobile)         ├── AG-UI session (laptop)
                             ├── AG-UI session (tablet)
                             └── A2A session (if a service)
So the relationships are:

Principal → capability channel: at most one active (the bound DIDComm/mobile)
Principal → conversation sessions: many, concurrent
Conversation session → capability channel: many-to-one (all share the Principal's one DIDComm channel)

This has three consequences I'll bake into the spec:
1. Auth challenges target the Principal, not the session. When the laptop AG-UI session triggers a transfer needing biometric auth, the challenge goes to the Principal's DIDComm channel (mobile). The result then has to route back to the originating session (the laptop), not broadcast to all of them. So a challenge carries an originSessionId so the core knows which conversation to resume — even though the challenge itself was Principal-scoped. The tablet session shouldn't suddenly react to a challenge the laptop initiated.
2. Conversation history is per-session, but the Principal is the join key. Each AG-UI session keeps its own conversation thread (the laptop chat ≠ the tablet chat). But cross-session memory, preferences, credentials, and the capability channel are all keyed on the Principal. This is exactly the cross-session-identity linchpin (your open #2): sessions link because they resolve to the same Principal, and the Principal is what carries everything durable.
3. Binding nonce is per-session, even when reusing an existing capability channel. When the user opens a second AG-UI session (tablet) while their mobile DIDComm channel is already established, the tablet still needs its own binding handshake to prove it belongs to that Principal — but the handshake can be satisfied by the existing DIDComm channel (confirm on mobile) rather than a fresh full authentication. So: new conversation session = new binding nonce, but binding can be served by an already-live capability channel with a lightweight confirmation, not a full re-auth. That's a much better UX (you don't re-scan-and-biometric every time you open a tab) without weakening the per-session binding integrity from concern #2.
The fallback policy — confirmed and located
Configurable-per-action, safe default hard-fail. I'll express it in the agent-pack as part of each action's authentication requirement, something like:
action: transfer_funds
  authChallenge:
    type: biometric          # or face-match, nfc
    onChannelUnavailable: fail   # default; alt: degrade
fail aborts the action and informs the LLM (which can explain to the principal why it couldn't proceed). degrade skips the challenge but writes an auth-challenge memory entry recording that the requirement was unmet — so the audit trail shows the action proceeded without the assurance it normally requires. Default is fail everywhere the field is omitted.

That resolves everything I had open on the identity/channel/trust layer. I now have a coherent model for sections 1–2 of the spec (identity & connection model, channel layer) and the cross-cutting capability-routing concept.
Before I start writing the full spec: the channel/identity/trust layer is now very well specified, but the memory + privacy + GDPR half (sections 3–4, which is the bulk of issue #84) we've only touched at the feature-list level. Do you want to do the same alignment pass on the memory/privacy architecture before I write — or is that half settled enough in the issue + GDPR comment that you'd rather I draft it from what's there and you react to the draft?You said: Do you think it is better if we have 1 separate DIDComm session per AG-UI/a2a session?Do you think it is better if we have 1 separate DIDComm session per AG-UI/a2a session?May 23Claude responded: Good question to stop on — but I'd push back on framing it as a global yes/no.Good question to stop on — but I'd push back on framing it as a global yes/no. The two channel types pull in opposite directions, so I think the right answer is different for A2A vs AG-UI.
A2A: yes, 1:1 DIDComm per A2A session
For service-to-service, pairing each A2A session with its own DIDComm session is clean:

A2A peers are machines — there's no "shared device" benefit to multiplexing. The UX argument that drives sharing for humans simply doesn't exist.
Credential exchange and trust are per-connection anyway. Each A2A relationship is its own trust context.
It's simpler to reason about: one A2A conversation, one DIDComm capability channel, torn down together. No shared-lifecycle puzzles.

So for A2A, 1:1 is the natural model and I'd spec it that way.
AG-UI: this is where it's a real trade-off
Here your earlier instinct (one shared mobile DIDComm channel across several AG-UI sessions) competes with the 1:1 alternative. Let me lay out what each actually costs, because the deciding factor isn't obvious.
The crux is device topology. A human's DIDComm wallet lives on one mobile device. Their AG-UI sessions are on other devices (laptop, tablet). So:
If 1:1 (separate DIDComm per AG-UI session):

You'd need a distinct DIDComm session backing each AG-UI tab. But there's only one wallet/device. So either:

the wallet juggles N parallel DIDComm connections to the same agent (workable, but the user re-confirms/re-binds for every tab they open — annoying), or
you spawn DIDComm sessions that aren't actually on a separate trusted device, which defeats the point of DIDComm being the sensor/trust channel.

The 1:1 model fights the physical reality that there's one wallet.
If shared (one DIDComm channel, N AG-UI sessions):

Matches the device reality — one wallet serves all the user's screens. Cost is the routing complexity we already worked out: challenges carry originSessionId, results route back to the initiating session, new tabs do a lightweight confirm rather than full re-auth. That complexity is real but bounded and already specified.
My recommendation
A2A → 1:1. AG-UI → shared capability channel per Principal.
The unifying principle that makes this not-inconsistent: the DIDComm capability channel is bound to the trust-bearing device, not to the conversation session. For A2A the "device" is the peer service itself, so there's exactly one conversation per peer and 1:1 falls out naturally. For humans the trust-bearing device is the mobile wallet, which is singular while screens are plural, so sharing falls out naturally. Same principle, different topology → different cardinality. That's coherent, not special-casing.
One concern that would change my mind
There's a scenario where 1:1 for AG-UI wins: if you want each AG-UI session to be independently revocable with full cryptographic isolation — e.g. the user loses their tablet and you must kill only that session's trust without forcing re-auth on the laptop. With a shared DIDComm channel, revoking trust revokes it for all sessions at once (they all hang off the one channel). With 1:1, each session's trust is independent.
So the real question back to you: do you need per-AG-UI-session trust revocation/isolation?

If sessions are ephemeral and "log out everywhere" is acceptable when trust is revoked → shared wins (simpler, matches device reality).
If you need fine-grained "kill this one screen, keep the others" → 1:1 wins, and you accept the re-binding friction.

My default, absent a strong isolation requirement, is shared for AG-UI — it matches the one-wallet reality and the routing cost is already paid for in the spec. But this is genuinely a product-security call about revocation granularity, so it's yours to make.
What's your revocation requirement?You said: So if I loose my handset, I reinstall hologram app, recover my credential, create a new AG-UI session, bind to a new DIDComm connection.So if I loose my handset, I reinstall hologram app, recover my credential, create a new AG-UI session, bind to a new DIDComm connection. So as this is a new DIDComm connection for my Principal, it should automatically revoke all previous AG-UI sessions?May 23Claude responded: Mostly yes — but be careful, because "new DIDComm connection" and "lost device" aren't the same trigger, and conflating them creates both a security hole and a…Mostly yes — but be careful, because "new DIDComm connection" and "lost device" aren't the same trigger, and conflating them creates both a security hole and a usability landmine. Let me separate them.
The subtlety: a new DIDComm connection is normal, not a revocation signal
In your shared-channel model, you'll create new DIDComm connections all the time during legitimate use — you said it yourself a couple turns ago: open a second AG-UI session, bind a new DIDComm connection. If "new DIDComm connection → revoke all prior sessions" were the rule, then opening your tablet would log out your laptop. That's the opposite of the shared-channel UX you wanted.
So "new connection revokes old sessions" is too blunt. The real trigger isn't a new connection — it's credential recovery on a new device. Those are different events, and only the second should cascade.
What actually distinguishes the lost-handset case
When you recover after losing your phone, the security-relevant fact isn't the new DIDComm connection — it's that your credential was re-issued / recovered onto new key material. The old device's keys should now be considered compromised (you don't know who has the lost phone). That's the revocation trigger.
This maps onto something you already have: credential revocation status (issue #84, goal 11 — "revocation status must be evaluated each time"). The lost-phone flow is really:
1. Lose phone
2. Recover credential on new device → this typically means the
   old credential is revoked and a new one issued (or new keys bound)
3. New AG-UI session authenticates with the NEW credential
4. Core detects: prior sessions were bound via a credential that
   is now REVOKED
5. → those sessions fail their next per-action revocation check
   → they're killed
So revocation cascades because the underlying credential is revoked, not because a new DIDComm connection appeared. That's the clean causal chain, and it reuses machinery the spec already requires.
This is why goal 11's "re-check every time" matters
Here's the elegant part: you don't need a separate "revoke all sessions" broadcast mechanism at all. Because the spec already mandates that credential revocation is re-evaluated on each privileged use, a session bound to a now-revoked credential simply stops working the next time it tries anything that matters. The lost-phone revocation is enforced lazily and automatically by the same check that's there for every other revocation reason.
You can make it eager (proactively kill sessions the moment the credential is revoked) as an optimization, but the correctness comes for free from per-use re-checking. A laptop session whose credential was revoked can't authorize a transfer, can't read private cross-session memory, can't do anything gated — it's inert even if not formally torn down.
The case that still needs an explicit decision
There's a gap: what about sessions doing nothing privileged? A laptop session that's just sitting in an idle chat, not invoking any gated action, won't hit a revocation check. Under purely-lazy enforcement it could linger, reading non-sensitive conversation, until it tries something gated.
For a lost-device scenario that's not good enough — you want the lost phone's access gone, not gone-on-next-sensitive-action. So I'd spec:

Lazy by default for ordinary revocation (correctness, low cost)
Eager cascade specifically on credential-recovery / key-rotation events — when the core sees a Principal's credential revoked-and-reissued, it proactively terminates all sessions bound to the old credential, not waiting for them to fail a check

So, refining your statement
Not "new DIDComm connection revokes prior AG-UI sessions" — that would break multi-screen UX.
Instead: "recovery onto a new device revokes the old credential; sessions bound to a revoked credential are terminated — eagerly on the recovery event, and lazily enforced on every privileged action regardless."
Same outcome you wanted for the lost-phone case (old sessions die), but it doesn't fire on the everyday "I just opened another tab" case.

Two things to confirm before I fold this into the identity/trust section:

Does credential recovery in Hologram actually revoke the prior credential? My chain above assumes recovery ⇒ old credential revoked / keys rotated. If recovery instead restores the same credential with the same keys (pure backup restore), then the lost phone still holds valid keys and revocation has to be triggered manually by the user ("I lost my device → revoke"). Which is it in your system?
Eager cascade scope: on a recovery/revocation event, kill all sessions on the old credential including any other DIDComm sessions — or only the AG-UI/A2A conversation sessions hanging off it? My instinct is all of them (the old key material is untrusted, full stop), but confirm.
You said: I'm confused.I'm confused. We said that for AG-UI sessions, we would have a single DIDComm connection for all sessions. So for me, closing the DIDComm connection should revoke all AG-UI sessions, or creating a new DIDComm connection and  authenticating with a principal that already has existing AG-UI sessions should close the AG-UI sessions linked to the previous DIDComm session. What do you think?May 23Claude responded: You're right, and I overcomplicated it.You're right, and I overcomplicated it. Let me drop the credential-revocation tangent — that was me importing a mechanism you didn't ask for. Your model is simpler and it's correct.
Your model, stated cleanly
The DIDComm capability channel is the anchor. AG-UI sessions hang off it. So the lifecycle is just:

DIDComm connection closes → all AG-UI sessions bound to it die. The anchor is gone, so the things hanging off it are gone. Clean.
New DIDComm connection authenticates as a Principal that already has a live DIDComm session → the old DIDComm session (and its AG-UI sessions) are closed. One active capability channel per Principal; the new one replaces the old.

That's coherent and it gives you exactly the lost-phone behavior you wanted: recover on the new device → new DIDComm connection → old DIDComm session and all its laptop/tablet AG-UI sessions are closed. No credential-revocation machinery needed. The connection lifecycle alone does it.
Where my earlier confusion crept in — and the one thing to nail down
I conflated two different events. Let me make sure your rule #2 doesn't accidentally break the multi-screen UX you wanted earlier, because the resolution is a single definition:
What counts as "a new DIDComm connection"?

When you open a second AG-UI session (tablet) and it does the lightweight confirm against your already-live mobile DIDComm channel — that is not a new DIDComm connection. It reuses the existing one. Both laptop and tablet stay alive. ✅
When you recover on a new phone and establish a genuinely new DIDComm channel — that is a new connection, and it replaces the prior one, closing its AG-UI sessions. ✅

So the rule is precise: "new DIDComm connection" = a new capability-channel establishment, not a new conversation session binding to the existing channel. Opening tabs reuses; recovering/re-establishing replaces. That single distinction makes rule #2 do exactly what you want in both cases without contradiction.
So the model is

One active DIDComm capability channel per Principal. Establishing a new one supersedes and closes the previous one.
AG-UI sessions are dependents of that channel. Channel closes (deliberately, or by being superseded) → its AG-UI sessions close.
Binding a new AG-UI session to the existing channel is not a new channel — it's a dependent attaching, and it leaves siblings untouched.

This is cleaner than what I was proposing and I'll spec it this way. Agreed completely — your instinct was right and the credential-revocation layer was unnecessary for this.
One small thing worth stating as an explicit consequence (not a new decision): for A2A it's the 1:1 model we settled — one A2A conversation, one DIDComm channel, no sharing — so "supersede on new connection" doesn't really apply there; an A2A peer reconnecting is just a fresh 1:1 pairing. The supersede rule is specifically an AG-UI/shared-channel concern. Does that match how you see A2A behaving?You said: I'll add an edge case: Principal credential revoked => close all sessions, tooI'll add an edge case: Principal credential revoked => close all sessions, tooMay 23Claude responded: Agreed — and that one slots in cleanly without reviving the complexity I wrongly introduced earlier.Agreed — and that one slots in cleanly without reviving the complexity I wrongly introduced earlier. The difference is that you're adding it as a deliberate, narrow rule, not as the mechanism for the lost-phone case. The lost-phone case is already handled by connection lifecycle; this is an independent safety rule for a different event.
The complete session-lifecycle model
There are now three distinct termination triggers, and they're cleanly separated:

DIDComm channel closes → its dependent AG-UI sessions close. (connection lifecycle)
New DIDComm channel supersedes an existing one for the same Principal → old channel + its AG-UI sessions close. (connection lifecycle — the lost-phone path)
Principal's credential is revoked → all of that Principal's sessions close, across every channel. (identity lifecycle — your addition)

The clean way to think about it: triggers 1–2 are about the channel (the transport/trust anchor), trigger 3 is about the Principal (the identity itself). Revocation invalidates the identity, so everything resolving to that Principal goes — DIDComm channel, all AG-UI sessions hanging off it, and any A2A sessions for that Principal too. It's the broadest trigger because it strikes at the root rather than a branch.
What this requires in the spec
Trigger 3 needs a detection point, and goal 11 already gives us one — "revocation status must be evaluated each time the agent uses a credential." So:

Lazy enforcement falls out for free: any session attempting a credential-gated action re-checks revocation and dies if revoked. No new mechanism.
Eager enforcement is the part that's a real addition: to close sessions immediately on revocation (not just when they next try something gated), the core needs to either subscribe to revocation events from the credential's revocation registry, or poll it. This is the one piece of new machinery trigger 3 introduces — and it's worth stating as such in the spec rather than hand-waving, because "close all sessions on revocation" is only as fast as your ability to learn about the revocation.

So I'll spec trigger 3 as: lazy enforcement guaranteed (via the per-use re-check goal 11 already mandates), with eager enforcement where a revocation notification/polling mechanism is available — and flag the revocation-detection latency as an explicit operational concern, not a solved problem, since it depends on what the Verana/credential layer exposes.
This was the genuinely correct place for credential revocation to enter the model — as your narrow trigger 3, not as my overreaching explanation of trigger 2. Good catch keeping them separate.

That fully closes the identity/channel/trust/lifecycle layer. I have a coherent model for it end to end.
Which brings me back to the fork in the road from a couple turns ago, now that this layer is locked: the memory + privacy + GDPR half (the bulk of issue #84) we've only aligned at the feature-list level. Two ways forward:

Align first — do the same kind of design pass on the memory/privacy architecture (tiered memory, working-memory-vs-summarization, the privacy-scope model, policy-before-retrieval, crypto-erasure + lineage) before I write anything.
Draft first — I write the full spec now from the issue + GDPR comment + everything we've settled, and you react to a concrete draft for the memory/privacy half.

Given how productive this back-and-forth has been, my instinct is align first on memory/privacy — it's the densest part and the part where the GDPR comment raised structural questions (lineage graph, access-before-retrieval) that deserve the same scrutiny we just gave channels. Which do you want?You said: Align firstAlign firstMay 23Claude responded: Good.Good. Let me run the same kind of pass. I'll start with the four structural decisions that everything else depends on — get these right and the rest follows. I'll give my position on each so you have something concrete to push against, rather than open-ended questions.
Decision 1 — The memory tiers and what's authoritative
We have several mechanisms floating around (raw history, working memory, summaries, embeddings). The risk is overlap — the same fact living in multiple places, which is both a token waste and a GDPR erasure nightmare. My proposed structure, with one authoritative source:
┌─ Long-term store (Postgres) ─────────────── AUTHORITATIVE
│   every MessageEntry, ever. The single source of truth.
│   Nothing else holds data that isn't derived from here.
│
├─ Active context window ──────────────────── DERIVED, transient
│   token-based slice of recent entries for this session.
│   Rebuilt each turn. Holds nothing original.
│
├─ Working memory ─────────────────────────── AUTHORITATIVE (curated)
│   LLM-written durable notes, Principal-scoped.
│   The ONE place curated cross-session facts live.
│
├─ Semantic index (pgvector) ──────────────── DERIVED
│   embeddings of entries. Pure accelerator for retrieval.
│   Rebuildable from the store. Holds no authority.
│
└─ Window summaries ───────────────────────── DERIVED, transient
    compression of old turns in the active window only.
    Never persisted as an independent record. Rebuilt on demand.
The principle: two authoritative stores (long-term + working memory), everything else is derived and rebuildable. This is what makes erasure tractable — you erase from the two authoritative places, and everything derived either rebuilds clean or is thrown away.
My position: this structure. The key commitment is that summaries are never authoritative — they're throwaway compression, never a persisted record that could outlive the data it summarizes. That directly answers the working-memory-vs-summarization overlap: they don't overlap because summaries aren't allowed to persist.
Decision 2 — Working memory vs. summarization, resolved
Following from Decision 1:

Working memory = the LLM deliberately deciding "this fact matters long-term" and writing it via tool call. Curated, authoritative, Principal-scoped, durable. The principal cannot edit it (mjfelis's security rule).
Summarization = mechanical compression of the active window when it overflows the token budget. Transient, derived, regenerated, never persisted as its own record.

They stop competing because one is curated+durable and the other is mechanical+throwaway. A fact that matters ends up in working memory by LLM decision; a fact that doesn't just ages out of the window and exists only in the raw long-term store.
My position: this split. Confirm it matches your intent.
Decision 3 — The privacy-scope model
The GDPR comment listed eight scopes, but they're actually two orthogonal axes plus a tag, which I flagged earlier. Cleaned up:
Axis A — Visibility (who may access): session-private · principal-private · organization-shared · partner-shared · public

Axis B — Lifecycle state (legal/retention status): active · archived · legal-hold · crypto-erased · deleted

Tag — Purpose: why the data was collected (enforces purpose-limitation on reuse)
The comment's list mixed these (audit-only, legal-hold are lifecycle; session-private, org-shared are visibility). Separating them means an entry is e.g. (visibility: principal-private, state: active, purpose: support) — three independent dimensions instead of one overloaded enum.
My position: two axes + purpose tag. This is a real divergence from the comment's flat list, so I want explicit buy-in.
Decision 4 — Access-before-retrieval, concretely
The GDPR comment's hardest requirement: "authorization must happen before retrieval, not filtering after the LLM has seen the data." This is non-negotiable for compliance but it constrains the architecture. What it means concretely:
Every memory retrieval — including semantic/vector search — must be scoped at query time by (principal, role, visibility, purpose, lifecycle state, and for cross-session: org/persona). The vector search runs within an already-authorized subset, never globally-then-filtered. So the pgvector query carries a mandatory pre-filter; there is no code path that embeds-search-all-then-drops-unauthorized.
My position: retrieval is a two-stage gate — authorize the scope first (compute what this principal/purpose may see), then search within it. This has a cost: it means no "search everything and rank" shortcut, and the authorization scope must be computable as a query predicate. I think that's the right cost to pay, but it does shape the data model (visibility/purpose/scope must all be indexed columns, not computed-at-read).

These four are the load-bearing decisions; reactions/approvals/credentials/preferences/auth-challenges are mostly settled in the issue and slot in once these are fixed. Crypto-erasure + the lineage graph also follow directly from Decisions 1 and 3 (you erase authoritative data; lineage tells you what derived data to rebuild/discard).
Take them one at a time or all at once — but those are the four I need your read on. Where do you disagree?You said: AgreeAgreeAgreeGive concrete examplesGive concrete examplesMay 23Claude responded: Good.Good. Here are concrete examples for both.
Decision 3 — The privacy-scope model, made concrete
Three independent dimensions on every entry. Let me show real entries from a plausible deployment — say, an HR/finance agent at a company.
Example A — a routine support question
Entry: "How do I reset my VPN password?"
  visibility: session-private    ← only this conversation
  state:      active
  purpose:    it-support
Stays in its session. Even an admin browsing cross-session memory for finance purposes shouldn't pull this — wrong purpose, private visibility.
Example B — a stated preference
Entry: "I prefer to be contacted in French."
  visibility: principal-private  ← follows the person across their sessions
  state:      active
  purpose:    communication-preference
Reusable when this same principal returns on a different device/session. Not visible to other principals. This is the kind of thing that also gets promoted to working memory.
Example C — a team-relevant fact
Entry: "Q3 travel budget freeze is in effect until October."
  visibility: organization-shared ← any principal in the org, right role
  state:      active
  purpose:    finance-policy
An operator handling someone else's expense question can surface this. A user-role principal might read it; a partner-connected principal cannot (not partner-shared).
Example D — the same fact, but legally frozen
Entry: "Transfer #4471 approved by CFO — $250k to vendor X."
  visibility: organization-shared
  state:      legal-hold          ← litigation; cannot be erased even on request
  purpose:    financial-transaction
Now watch the axes work independently: visibility still says "org can see it," but lifecycle state says "this cannot be deleted regardless of an erasure request." A GDPR erasure request that would normally crypto-erase this entry is blocked by the lifecycle state, while visibility is unchanged. One overloaded enum couldn't express "org-visible AND undeletable" — two axes can.
Example E — after an accepted erasure request
Entry: <ciphertext, key destroyed>
  visibility: principal-private   ← unchanged
  state:      crypto-erased       ← plaintext now unrecoverable
  purpose:    communication-preference
The visibility and purpose tags survive (they're non-personal metadata needed for audit — "an entry of this purpose existed and was erased on this date"), but the content is gone and the digest anchor still validates over the ciphertext.
Why this matters — the cross-product is the point. A flat enum forces you to pick one label. The two-axis model lets you express the combinations that actually occur: org-shared + legal-hold, principal-private + crypto-erased, session-private + active. Purpose then cuts across both — it's why, independent of who-sees and what-state.
Decision 4 — Access-before-retrieval, made concrete
The whole point: the unauthorized data must never enter the query result set, not get filtered out after. Here's the contrast in concrete terms.
The WRONG pattern (filter-after) — forbidden by the spec:
1. principal asks: "what do we know about vendor X?"
2. embed the query
3. vector search across ALL entries, all sessions, all principals
4. get top-20 semantically similar hits
5. filter out the ones this principal isn't allowed to see
6. pass survivors to the LLM
Why it's forbidden: at step 4 the system has already retrieved personal data the principal had no right to. Even if step 5 drops it before the LLM, it was read, ranked, and momentarily in scope. Under the GDPR comment's rule that's a violation — and worse, the ranking itself leaked information (the fact that 7 of 20 hits were dropped tells you something exists).
The REQUIRED pattern (authorize-then-search):
1. principal asks: "what do we know about vendor X?"
2. compute the AUTHORIZATION SCOPE first, as a query predicate:
     - principal P, holding role = operator
     - purpose of this interaction = finance-support
     - therefore allowed:
         visibility IN (organization-shared, public)
         AND purpose COMPATIBLE WITH finance-support
         AND state = active            ← not archived/erased/hold
         AND org = <this principal's org>
3. embed the query
4. vector search WITHIN that predicate only
     SELECT ... WHERE <scope predicate> ORDER BY embedding <-> query
5. top-K results are already all authorized — pass to LLM
The unauthorized entries are never in the candidate set. The vector index is queried with the scope as a mandatory WHERE clause, so similarity ranking only ever runs over data the principal may see.
A concrete consequence — purpose limitation in action:
Same principal, same vendor, but now in a different hat:

Interaction purpose = hr-investigation (not finance-support)
  → scope predicate now allows purpose COMPATIBLE WITH hr-investigation
  → vendor X's *financial-transaction* entries are NOT in scope
  → the search literally cannot return them, even though they're
    semantically the best match for "vendor X"
The same person, same query text, gets different results depending on the purpose of the interaction — because purpose is part of the pre-filter, not an afterthought. Data collected for finance doesn't bleed into an HR investigation.
What this costs the data model (the real implication):
For the scope to be a query predicate, every dimension it filters on must be an indexed column, not something computed at read time:
message_entry:
  id, principal_id, session_id, org_id,
  visibility   ENUM   ← indexed
  state        ENUM   ← indexed
  purpose      TEXT   ← indexed
  embedding    VECTOR ← pgvector index
  ...
There's no path where you load an entry into memory and then decide if it's allowed. Allowed-ness is decidable in SQL, before a row is returned. That's the architectural price of access-before-retrieval, and it's why visibility/state/purpose can't be buried inside a JSON blob — they're first-class indexed columns.
The other consequence — the access log (closing the GDPR loop):
Every one of these authorized retrievals writes an entry to the memory-access log the GDPR comment demanded:
access_log:
  who:        principal P (operator)
  purpose:    finance-support
  scope:      {org-shared, public} ∩ finance-compatible ∩ active
  matched:    [entry_88, entry_142, entry_201]
  shown_to_llm: true
  influenced_tool_call: transfer_lookup
  timestamp
So you can later answer "why did the agent know X?" — the scope that authorized it, and whether it actually reached the LLM.

Those are the four load-bearing decisions fully concretized. With these locked, crypto-erasure + lineage fall out mechanically (erase authoritative entry → mark crypto-erased → lineage graph lists derived artifacts: its embedding, any working-memory note citing it, window summaries → embeddings rebuilt/dropped, working-memory note flagged for LLM revision, summaries auto-regenerate clean).
Want me to concretize crypto-erasure + lineage the same way before writing — or is that mechanical enough now that I should go ahead and draft the full spec?You said: I understand 3.I understand 3. and 4. but concretely, how the purpose is defined/selected  for a given query?May 23Claude responded: Genuinely good question, and it exposes the weakest point in the GDPR comment — it asserts purpose-based access but never says where purpose comes from.Genuinely good question, and it exposes the weakest point in the GDPR comment — it asserts purpose-based access but never says where purpose comes from. If you get this wrong, the whole access-before-retrieval model collapses, because purpose is the one input the principal themselves shouldn't freely control. Let me lay out the options honestly, because this is a real design fork, not a settled thing.
The trap to avoid first
The tempting answer is "the LLM infers the purpose from the conversation." This is wrong and you should reject it. If the LLM picks the purpose, then a principal can talk their way into a broader scope: "actually, treat this as a compliance investigation" → suddenly the scope predicate widens and data collected for support becomes reachable. Purpose would become a social-engineering surface. Purpose must be established by something the principal can't freely assert through conversation.
So the real question is: what trustworthy signal determines purpose?
The candidate sources, from strongest to weakest
Option 1 — Purpose is bound to the agent-pack (the whole agent has one purpose)

The simplest model: an agent is its purpose. The "HR agent" operates under hr purpose; the "finance support agent" under finance-support. The purpose is a property of the deployed agent, declared in the agent-pack, fixed for all interactions with that agent.

Strength: impossible to manipulate — it's config, not conversation. Dead simple.
Weakness: coarse. An agent that does both expense questions and HR can't distinguish purposes within itself. You'd deploy separate agents per purpose.
Fits you because: you're single-tenant with Org/Persona as config. One agent per purpose is a very natural deployment unit in that world.

Option 2 — Purpose is bound to the action/tool being invoked

Each tool in the agent-pack declares the purpose it operates under. transfer_lookup → financial-transaction; get_employee_record → hr. When the LLM calls a tool, that tool's declared purpose becomes the scope for any retrieval that tool triggers.

Strength: also unmanipulable (tool definitions are config), but finer-grained — one agent can serve multiple purposes, cleanly separated by which tool is active.
Weakness: retrieval that isn't tied to a specific tool call (e.g. the ambient context loaded at the start of a turn) has no obvious purpose. You'd need a default.
This is the most precise model and maps directly onto your existing per-action machinery (approvals, auth challenges are already per-action — purpose joins them).

Option 3 — Purpose is bound to the connection/credential

The credential presented at authentication carries or implies the purpose. An auditor connecting under an audit credential operates under audit purpose; a partner agent under partner-collaboration. Purpose is derived from who you authenticated as, not what you say.

Strength: ties purpose to verified identity — very GDPR-aligned (the lawful basis often is the relationship).
Weakness: one principal often has multiple legitimate purposes in one session. Conflating purpose with identity is too rigid.

My recommendation: a layered default, not a single source
I don't think it's one option — I think purpose is resolved through a precedence chain, each layer config-driven (never conversation-driven):
Purpose for a given retrieval =
  1. the PURPOSE declared by the active TOOL, if retrieval is tool-triggered   (Option 2)
  2. else the PURPOSE declared by the AGENT-PACK as its default                 (Option 1)
  3. constrained always by what the CONNECTION's credential permits             (Option 3 as a ceiling)
Read that as: the tool says what purpose it's acting for; absent a tool, the agent's default purpose applies; and in all cases the principal's credential sets the outer ceiling of purposes they're allowed to invoke at all. The LLM never names the purpose — it only chooses which tool to call, and the tool's config carries the purpose.
A concrete trace:
Principal: operator, authenticated with a credential whose
           permitted purposes = {finance-support, finance-audit}

Turn: "what's the status of vendor X's payments?"
  → LLM calls tool `payment_status`
  → `payment_status` declares purpose = finance-support       (layer 1)
  → is finance-support within the credential's ceiling? yes   (layer 3 ✓)
  → retrieval scope = finance-support-compatible entries
  → returns vendor X's payment entries

Same principal: "and pull up their disciplinary file"
  → LLM calls tool `hr_record`
  → `hr_record` declares purpose = hr                          (layer 1)
  → is hr within the credential's ceiling {finance-*}? NO      (layer 3 ✗)
  → tool call REFUSED before any retrieval — wrong purpose
    for this principal's credential
The principal can ask for anything; the purpose is decided by the tool config and gated by the credential, so widening scope by conversational framing is structurally impossible.
The one piece this still needs from you
The credential ceiling (layer 3) requires that credentials carry permitted-purpose information — or that the agent-pack maps roles/credentials → permitted purposes. Given your model (identity from VC claims for humans, ECS-Org/ECS-Persona for services), the natural fit is: the agent-pack declares the role → permitted-purposes mapping, since roles are already extracted from credential claims. That keeps purpose authorization in the same config surface as RBAC, rather than requiring purpose to be minted into the credentials themselves.
So my full position: purpose comes from tool config (primary) and agent-pack default (fallback), bounded by a role→purpose ceiling declared in the agent-pack — never from the LLM or the conversation.
Two things to confirm:

Does the tool-declares-purpose + agent-pack-default + role-ceiling chain match how you want it to work, or do you lean toward the simpler Option 1 (one agent = one purpose) given you're single-tenant and may just deploy purpose-specific agents anyway?
For the ceiling: role → permitted-purposes in the agent-pack (my recommendation), or do you want purpose carried in the credential itself?
You said: so what you name purpose is a role assigned to a principalso what you name purpose is a role assigned to a principalMay 23Claude responded: No — and this is worth pinning down precisely, because if purpose and role collapse into the same thing, the GDPR model loses its teeth.No — and this is worth pinning down precisely, because if purpose and role collapse into the same thing, the GDPR model loses its teeth. They're correlated in my examples, which is probably why it looks like they're the same, but they answer different questions.
Role and purpose are different axes

Role = who you are / what you're allowed to do. A property of the principal. operator, auditor, finance-manager. Answers: "is this person permitted to perform this action at all?"
Purpose = why this data is being processed right now. A property of the interaction/action. finance-support, hr-investigation, fraud-audit. Answers: "for what lawful reason is this data being touched in this moment?"

GDPR cares about purpose specifically because the same person with the same permissions can process the same data for legitimate or illegitimate reasons. Role can't capture that — it's about authority, not about reason.
The case that proves they're distinct
Take one principal, one role, two purposes — role held constant, purpose varying:
Principal: Alice, role = operator (fixed)

Interaction 1 — purpose: finance-support
  Alice helps an employee with an expense reimbursement.
  In scope: that employee's expense entries.

Interaction 2 — purpose: fraud-audit
  Alice investigates suspicious transactions.
  In scope: transaction patterns across many employees.
Same Alice, same operator role both times. But the data she may touch differs by purpose: in the support interaction she should not be pulling cross-employee transaction patterns (that's not why this employee came to her — purpose limitation), and in the fraud audit she legitimately can. If purpose were role, Alice would have one fixed scope and you couldn't distinguish these — she'd either always have fraud-audit reach (over-broad, violates minimization) or never (can't do her job).
And the reverse case — two roles sharing one purpose:
Purpose: fraud-audit
  - Alice (operator) and Bob (auditor) both act under it.
  - Same purpose-scope for the data;
  - but Bob (auditor) additionally has read access to legal-hold
    entries Alice can't see — that difference is ROLE.
So: purpose decides which data is in scope for this reason; role decides what this principal may do and see within their authority. The retrieval predicate uses both: WHERE purpose-compatible(interaction_purpose) AND visibility-allowed(principal_role).
Why I tied them together earlier (the part that confused this)
In my precedence chain, role appeared only as the ceiling — "is this principal's role even allowed to invoke this purpose?" That's a gate on which purposes are reachable, not purpose itself. Alice's operator role permits her to act under both finance-support and fraud-audit; a plain user role might permit only self-service. The role bounds the set of purposes available; the active purpose is then selected per-action (by the tool being called). Two layers, not one.
Concretely, where each comes from
ROLE:    extracted from the principal's credential claims at auth.
         Stable for the session. → "Alice is an operator."

PURPOSE: declared by the tool the LLM invokes (or agent-pack default),
         varying per action. → "this action processes data for fraud-audit."

CEILING: agent-pack maps role → permitted purposes.
         → "operator may act under {finance-support, fraud-audit};
            user may act under {self-service} only."
So the answer to your question: purpose is not the role. Purpose is per-action and says why; role is per-principal and says who/what-allowed; the agent-pack's role→purpose map is the bridge that says which whys this who may invoke. The retrieval scope is the intersection of all three.
Does that distinction hold up for your use cases — can you think of a deployment where you'd genuinely want purpose and role to be the same thing? Because if your agents are always single-purpose (one agent = one reason for existing), then in practice purpose becomes constant per-agent and role does carry the variation — and at that point collapsing them might be a defensible simplification for your specific deployments, even though they're conceptually distinct.You said: Understood.Understood. Are you aware on other software using this model?May 23Claude responded: <br><br>
Let me search rather than answer from memory — purpose-limitation enforcement in software is a fast-moving area and I'd rather give you real systems than half-remembered ones.Searched the webSearched the webYes — what we've designed is a real, named pattern, and it's well-established outside the LLM world. It's called Purpose-Based Access Control (PBAC), and the role-vs-purpose distinction you pushed on is exactly the distinction the literature draws.
It's a recognized model: PBAC
Purpose-based access control doesn't focus on individual users; instead it adds a contextual layer of specific data-use purposes that determines whether access is granted or denied — positioned as the next step in the evolution of access controls after RBAC and ABAC. That contextual layer on top of role is precisely what we landed on. Immuta
And the literature confirms your instinct that purpose ≠ role. Policy-based access control (RBAC and its successor ABAC) determines access based on the role or attributes of the individual; purpose-based access control instead adds a contextual layer of data-use purposes — and these models can be implemented simultaneously to make access decisions based on both dynamic attributes and contextual purposes. "Simultaneously" is our retrieval predicate: role-allows(...) AND purpose-compatible(...). Immuta
Where it's actually implemented
Immuta is the most prominent commercial system built around PBAC — it's a data-access-governance platform where analysts must operate under a declared purpose, and policies grant access based on that purpose rather than identity alone. That's the closest production analog to what you're building, just for data warehouses instead of agent memory.
The "purpose checks in application logic" pattern is the mainstream implementation approach: restrict access to personal data based on each user's purpose-related permissions, and add purpose checks in application logic that consult purpose metadata and block access attempts that don't align — so that, for example, a job applicant's phone number isn't usable by the marketing system. That applicant/marketing example is structurally identical to our Alice finance-support-vs-fraud-audit case. Plerion
The academic grounding (relevant to how you select purpose)
This is the part that validates the specific design choice you interrogated. There's a 2023 JURIX paper that models purpose the same way we did — as the action, not the actor: it models purpose as an action or sequence of actions and formalizes action relationships to derive purpose-based permissions, introducing a purpose-based access control model with a purpose-matching algorithm, illustrated with a healthcare research use case. SAGE Publications
That is exactly our resolution: purpose comes from the action/tool being invoked, not from the principal. The academic model derives permissions from actions; we derive purpose from the tool call. Same idea.
There's also a stricter cryptographic variant worth knowing about, because it's adjacent to your crypto-erasure design: a system model enforcing purpose limitation based on data tagging and attribute-based encryption — encrypting sensitive data such that only services for a certain purpose can decrypt it, ensuring access control based on the purpose of a service. That's PBAC enforced by encryption rather than by query predicate — interesting, but heavier than you need, and it fights your access-before-retrieval-via-SQL-predicate model. ACM Digital Library
The honest gap
What I could not find is anyone doing PBAC specifically for LLM agent memory — purpose-scoping a vector/semantic retrieval before it reaches a model's context window. The pattern is mature for databases and data platforms (Immuta, the XACML/eFLINT academic work), but applying it to agent memory retrieval — where the "query" is a semantic similarity search and the "data subject" is a conversational principal — appears to be novel territory. The closest formal frameworks are XACML extensions: the XACML architecture standard, applicable to both access and usage control, has been extended to show how GDPR-based normative reasoning can integrate into existing distributed data-processing systems. ResearchGate
So your model is standard PBAC (well-trodden) applied to a novel substrate (agent memory). That's a good place to be — you're not inventing the access-control theory, you're porting a proven model onto a new surface. It means you can borrow vocabulary and design patterns from PBAC/XACML directly (purpose definitions, purpose-matching, the policy decision point / policy enforcement point split) rather than reinventing them.
One practical takeaway for the spec: PBAC systems formalize a purpose hierarchy (purposes can be more/less specific, and a purpose-matching algorithm decides compatibility — e.g. does fraud-audit satisfy a requirement for finance-*?). Our "purpose-compatible(...)" predicate is hand-wavy right now; the PBAC literature's purpose-matching algorithms are exactly what would make it concrete. Worth citing that as the basis rather than inventing matching rules from scratch.
Want me to fold a short "prior art / model basis" note into the spec — naming PBAC, the PEP/PDP split, and purpose hierarchies as the formal grounding — so the privacy architecture isn't presented as bespoke invention? Or keep the spec implementation-focused and leave the academic lineage out?You said: Want me to fold a short "prior art / model basis" note into the spec — naming PBAC, the PEP/PDP split, and purpose hierarchies as the formal grounding — so the…Want me to fold a short "prior art / model basis" note into the spec — naming PBAC, the PEP/PDP split, and purpose hierarchies as the formal grounding — so the privacy architecture isn't presented as bespoke invention? Yes, better for justifying.Any other topic we must check before writing the spec?May 23Claude responded: Yes — a few things are still genuinely undecided, and they're the kind that are cheap to settle now but expensive to retrofit.Yes — a few things are still genuinely undecided, and they're the kind that are cheap to settle now but expensive to retrofit. Let me give you the short list, grouped by how much they actually need you versus how much I can default-and-flag.
Needs your input (architectural, hard to change later)
1. The PEP/PDP boundary — where does the policy decision actually execute?

We agreed access-before-retrieval via SQL predicate. But PBAC's Policy Decision Point (computes the scope) and Policy Enforcement Point (applies it) can sit in different places, and it matters: if the PDP logic lives in application code that builds the query, a bug or a future code path can bypass it. The robust alternative is enforcing at the database boundary (Postgres row-level security), so even a buggy query physically cannot return unauthorized rows. RLS is stronger but constrains your schema and connection model. My instinct: app-layer PDP for v2, with the predicate centralized in one query-builder that all retrieval must route through, and RLS noted as a v3 hardening. Your call, because it shapes the data layer.
2. Embeddings and crypto-erasure collide.

The GDPR comment explicitly says embeddings are derived personal data subject to erasure. But you can't "destroy the key" of a vector the way you can ciphertext — an embedding is a lossy-but-real derivation of the plaintext. So when an entry is crypto-erased, its embedding must be hard-deleted (not crypto-erased), which means the semantic index is not fully covered by the digest/anchor chain. That's fine, but it's an asymmetry the spec must state explicitly: authoritative data is crypto-erased; derived embeddings are hard-deleted on erasure. Confirm you're okay with embeddings being outside the immutability chain.
3. Consent — the GDPR comment implies it but we never modeled it.

Purpose-limitation's legal basis is often consent, and the comment's transparency section ("users should understand what's remembered/reused/shared") points at it. Do we model consent as a first-class object (principal grants/revokes consent per purpose, and retrieval checks it alongside role+purpose), or treat lawful basis as out-of-scope config the operator asserts? My instinct: out of scope for v2 — assume operator-asserted lawful basis, model consent as a v3 extension — because full consent management is its own subsystem. But if your deployments are consumer-facing you may need it in v2.
I can default-and-flag (tell me if any deserve real discussion)
4. The agent's own identity. Issue #84 is all about principals connecting in. But when your agent connects out over A2A as a client (the MCP/tool-use direction from way back in our first conversation), it's a principal to that agent. Does v2 spec the agent-as-client identity, or only agent-as-server? I'd default to server-side only for v2, note client-side as the A2A-egress story.
5. Multi-language. The current system has EN/ES/FR/PT. Does the rich memory model store the original language, and do summaries/embeddings run per-language? I'd default to store original + language tag; embeddings are multilingual-model's problem; don't translate at rest.
6. Failure modes of the trust layer. What happens to in-flight conversations when Verana is unreachable (can't anchor digests) or the credential revocation registry is down (can't re-check)? I'd default to anchoring is async/best-effort with a retry queue (never blocks conversation); revocation-check-unavailable defaults to fail-closed for gated actions, fail-open for ungated — but the revocation default is a security call you might want to own.
7. Versioning/migration. The system-prompt add-on is versioned (goal 15). Should the memory schema and agent-pack schema also carry versions so old packs/data survive upgrades? I'd default to yes, version all three; spec a migration note.
My recommendation
Items 1, 2, 3 deserve a genuine answer from you — they're structural and security-relevant. Items 4–7 I can write with the defaults above and clearly flag in an "assumptions" section for you to override on review.
So: give me your read on the PEP/PDP boundary (1), embeddings-outside-immutability (2), and consent-in-or-out (3) — and tell me if any of 4–7 are actually load-bearing for your use case rather than safe to default. Then I have everything.
One meta-note: we've made a lot of decisions across this conversation. When I write, I'll open the spec with a consolidated "Decisions & Rationale" table capturing every resolved fork (channels-as-peers, DIDComm-as-capability-channel, the three session-termination triggers, two-axis privacy model, purpose-from-tool, PBAC grounding, etc.) so the reasoning is traceable and you can spot anything I've misremembered before reading the detail.You said: 1 => OK1 => OK
2-3 => we'll check later
4 => there is no server/client distinction for a2a. Both are peers, and each peer identifies the peer Principal with the ECS-Org or ECS-Persona credential it presents.
5 => Is it really needed to manage languages in agent pack? I think that agent should be configured in a given language,  and then for AG-UI user sessions user may be able to configure the frontend to choose a specific language
6 => Agree
7 => I do not remember what is the purpose of the system-prompt add-on. Any clue?May 23Claude responded: Good — let me address 4, 5, 7 and then I'm ready.Good — let me address 4, 5, 7 and then I'm ready.
4 — A2A peers, no client/server. Understood and corrected.
This is cleaner than what I proposed. There's no asymmetry: when two agents connect over A2A, each is a Principal to the other, and each resolves the other's identity from the ECS-Org or ECS-Persona credential the peer presents. So "agent-as-client identity" was a false distinction on my part — it's just the same Principal model applied symmetrically. An A2A peer is a Principal whose connection type is verifiable-service and whose userIdentity derives from ECS-Org/ECS-Persona, exactly as we set in your point #2 several turns ago. I'll spec A2A identity as fully symmetric, no special egress story.
5 — You're right; drop multi-language from the agent-pack.
Your reasoning is sound and it's a genuine simplification. The split is:

Agent language = a single configured language for the agent's own operation (its system prompt, its reasoning, how it writes). One language, set in config. Not a per-message negotiation.
Presentation language = an AG-UI frontend concern. The user picks their UI language; the frontend handles localization of its own chrome. If they want the agent to converse in another language, that's just a normal conversational request to the LLM, not a config axis.

So memory stores whatever language the conversation actually happened in (with a language tag for accuracy, essentially free), and there's no per-language summary/embedding machinery. The current EN/ES/FR/PT i18n in the existing system was really about the menu/flow strings — which, in the new model, is either agent-language config or AG-UI frontend localization. Either way, not a memory-layer concern. I'll remove it from the memory architecture entirely and note that flow/menu localization belongs to the channel adapter (AG-UI) or agent-pack language config, not the core.
7 — The system-prompt add-on: here's what it's for
This came from issue #84 (design goal 15), not from our conversation, so no surprise it's faded. The purpose:
The agent-pack author writes their system prompt — the agent's persona, domain, instructions. But the platform gives the agent a bunch of capabilities the author didn't write and may not even know the exact mechanics of: it can recall past conversations, set reactionPolicy on messages, call save_principal_preference, request approvals, read its own working memory, etc. The LLM has to be told these capabilities exist and how to invoke them, or they're dead features — the model won't use a tool it wasn't told about.
The system-prompt add-on is the platform's auto-appended block that teaches the LLM about the platform-level capabilities, layered on top of whatever the agent-pack author wrote. Goal 15's four properties:

Additive — never overrides the author's prompt, only appends platform capability instructions
Feature-gated — only describes capabilities that are actually enabled (no point telling the LLM about reactionPolicy if reactions are off — wastes tokens and invites hallucinated tool calls)
Versioned — as the platform evolves the capability set, the add-on is versioned so an old agent-pack doesn't suddenly get new instructions that conflict with its assumptions
Token-conscious — capped (goal 15 said ~500 tokens) because it's pure overhead against the context budget

In our richer model it matters more than goal 15 anticipated, because we've added capabilities the LLM must understand to use correctly: working memory (when to write to it, that the principal can't see/edit it), the fact that retrieval is purpose-scoped (so it understands why some recall "fails" — it wasn't in-scope, not that it doesn't exist), and that auth challenges are system-triggered not LLM-triggered. The add-on is how the LLM learns the rules of the world it lives in.
So: it's the contract between the platform and the LLM — "here are the capabilities I'm giving you and how to use them" — kept separate from the agent-pack author's "here's who you are and what you do." Two concerns, two prompt layers, cleanly separated.

That closes everything. To recap what's now locked since the last batch:

A2A identity is symmetric peer-to-peer via ECS-Org/ECS-Persona; no client/server distinction
Multi-language removed from the memory/core layer; agent has one configured language, presentation language is an AG-UI frontend concern
PEP/PDP enforced app-layer via one centralized query-builder, RLS noted as v3
Trust-layer failure modes: async best-effort anchoring with retry queue; revocation-check-unavailable fails closed for gated actions
Schema versioning for memory, agent-pack, and prompt add-on
Embeddings-vs-erasure (2) and consent (3) explicitly deferred — I'll mark them as open in the spec, not silently resolve them
PBAC / PEP-PDP / purpose-hierarchy prior-art note to be folded into the privacy section

I'm ready to write. The spec will open with the consolidated Decisions & Rationale table covering every fork from this whole conversation so you can verify my memory before reading the detail, then the full architecture across identity/channels/trust, memory tiers, privacy/GDPR (PBAC-grounded), RBAC, interaction features, integrity/audit, and platform plumbing — framework-agnostic throughout, with a deferred/open-questions section and a phased rollout.
Shall I write it now?You said: we are missing 2.we are missing 2. and 3.Explain more detailedMay 23Claude responded: Right — we parked those two as "check later," and now is later.Right — we parked those two as "check later," and now is later. Let me lay each out in enough detail that you can actually decide, because both have real forks with consequences.
2 — Embeddings vs. crypto-erasure
The setup. Your crypto-erasure model (from the GDPR comment, agreed earlier) works like this for normal data: encrypt each sensitive entry with its own key, anchor the digest over the ciphertext, and on an accepted erasure request you destroy the key. The plaintext becomes unrecoverable, but the digest still validates over the ciphertext, so the Verana anchor chain stays intact. Elegant — erasure without touching the ledger.
The problem. An embedding is a vector — say 1536 floats — derived from the plaintext. It is personal data (the GDPR comment is explicit: embeddings are derived personal data subject to erasure). But it does not behave like ciphertext:

You can't "destroy a key" to neutralize an embedding. It isn't encrypted-and-recoverable; it's a lossy transformation that's already sitting there in the clear in your vector index.
Embeddings are partially invertible. There's a body of research showing you can reconstruct meaningful fragments of source text from its embedding. So a crypto-erased entry whose embedding survives is a real leak — the plaintext is "gone" but a vector that approximates its meaning (and can be partially inverted) remains queryable.

So if you crypto-erase the authoritative entry but leave its embedding in the index, you haven't actually erased the personal data — you've left a derived, partially-reversible copy in the one place that's designed to be semantically searchable. That's close to the worst case for GDPR.
The fork — what to do with the embedding on erasure:

Option A — Hard-delete the embedding. When an entry is crypto-erased, physically remove its row from the vector index. Plaintext crypto-erased, embedding gone. Consequence: the embedding was never anchored, so the immutability chain doesn't cover it — but that's fine, because an embedding is derived/rebuildable and was never authoritative. The asymmetry to state in the spec: authoritative entries are crypto-erased (key destroyed, ciphertext + anchor retained); derived embeddings are hard-deleted (gone, not anchored).
Option B — Encrypt embeddings too, destroy that key on erasure. Treat the embedding like any other sensitive blob: store it encrypted, decrypt-on-load for search. Consequence: this breaks vector search. You can't run an approximate-nearest-neighbour query over encrypted vectors without either decrypting them all at query time (defeats the index, catastrophic performance) or homomorphic/searchable-encryption schemes (research-grade, not production-ready in pgvector). So Option B is essentially incompatible with how vector indexes work.
Option C — Don't index sensitive entries at all. Only embed entries whose visibility/sensitivity permits it; the most sensitive data is retrievable only by exact/structured query, never semantic. Consequence: safest, but you lose semantic recall over exactly the data that might matter, and you need a clean rule for "which entries are embeddable."

My recommendation: Option A, with a touch of C. Hard-delete embeddings on erasure (the only approach compatible with real vector search), and additionally let the privacy scope gate whether an entry is embedded in the first place — e.g. legal-hold or certain purposes might be flagged "do not embed." State plainly in the spec that the semantic index sits outside the immutability/anchor chain (it's derived and rebuildable) and is fully erasable by hard-delete. That keeps erasure honest and vector search functional.
The decision I need from you: confirm Option A (embeddings hard-deleted on erasure, explicitly outside the anchor chain), and tell me whether you want the privacy scope to also control embeddability per entry (the bit of C). The second part matters because "do we embed this at all?" is a new field in the data model.
3 — Consent as a first-class object, or operator-asserted lawful basis?
The setup. PBAC enforces purpose limitation — data collected for purpose X isn't reused for purpose Y. But GDPR purpose limitation rests on a lawful basis for each purpose, and for many deployments that lawful basis is the data subject's consent. The GDPR comment's transparency section ("users should understand what's remembered, reused, shared, retained, deleted") is gesturing at consent without naming it.
The question: does the system model consent, or does it assume someone else handled it?
The fork:

Option A — Consent is out of scope; lawful basis is operator-asserted. The operator configuring the agent-pack declares "this agent processes data under lawful basis B for purposes P" and takes legal responsibility for that being true. The system enforces purpose limitation (the PBAC machinery) but doesn't track per-principal consent. Consequence: simpler — no consent subsystem. Adequate when lawful basis is contract or legitimate interest (e.g. an internal corporate HR agent — employees don't "consent," the employment relationship is the basis). Inadequate for consumer-facing deployments where consent is the basis and must be granular, revocable, and provable.
Option B — Consent is a first-class object. Model consent records: a principal grants/revokes consent per purpose, with timestamp and version, and retrieval checks consent alongside role + purpose. The scope predicate becomes role-allows AND purpose-compatible AND principal-consented(purpose) AND state=active. Consequence: this is a real subsystem — consent capture (over which channel? DIDComm? AG-UI?), consent versioning (consent to v1 of a purpose ≠ v2), consent revocation (which cascades like erasure — revoking consent for purpose P should make P-collected data unprocessable), and the proof trail (you must be able to demonstrate consent existed). It also interacts with everything: a revoked consent is almost an erasure-lite, so it touches the lineage graph too.

Why this is genuinely hard to defer cleanly. Consent revocation behaves like a softer erasure — "stop processing my data for marketing" means the marketing-purpose entries become non-retrievable but not deleted. If you defer consent entirely, you may later find the data model can't express "present but not processable for purpose P," and retrofitting that touches the same predicate and lineage machinery you'd rather not reopen. So even if you defer the subsystem, you might want to leave a seam for it.
My recommendation: Option A for v2, but reserve the seam. Concretely: assume operator-asserted lawful basis (no consent capture/management subsystem in v2), but include a lawfulBasis field on the purpose definition and design the scope predicate so a consent-check term can be slotted in later without reshaping it. That way an internal/enterprise deployment works fully in v2, and a future consumer-facing v3 adds the consent subsystem by populating a field and extending one predicate — not by rearchitecting. The spec would state: v2 supports consent, contract, and legitimate-interest bases; consent is operator-asserted and not actively managed; per-principal consent management is a v3 extension with a reserved integration point.
The decision I need from you: is any near-term deployment consumer-facing with consent as the lawful basis? If yes, Option B has to be in v2 and I'll spec the consent subsystem properly. If your near-term deployments are enterprise/internal (employment, contract, or legitimate-interest basis), Option A-with-a-seam is right and consent becomes v3.

So, two concrete asks:

Embeddings: confirm Option A (hard-delete on erasure, index outside the anchor chain) — and yes/no on privacy-scope controlling embeddability per entry.
Consent: are near-term deployments consumer-facing-with-consent, or enterprise/internal? That single fact decides B-now vs A-with-seam.
You said: I agree with Option A, nevertheless I do not understand why you want to add a touch of C.I agree with Option A, nevertheless I do not understand why you want to add a touch of C. Could you give a concrete exampleMay 23Claude responded: Fair challenge.Fair challenge. Let me give a concrete example, and then I'll be honest about whether it actually earns its place — because on reflection, the case for it is weaker than I implied, and you're right to interrogate it.
The concrete scenario for "touch of C"
C = privacy scope decides whether an entry gets embedded at all, independent of erasure.
Imagine a finance agent. A principal, mid-conversation, says:
"My card number is 4539 1488 0343 6467, expiry 08/29, CVV 114."
This becomes a MessageEntry. Under our model it gets:

stored (authoritative, encrypted)
and — by default — embedded into the pgvector index so semantic recall works

The "touch of C" says: an entry like this should be flagged do-not-embed, so it's stored and recoverable by structured query, but never enters the semantic index.
Why someone would want that: the embedding of that sentence sits in the vector index in a form that's (a) partially invertible and (b) semantically searchable. So later, an unrelated query like "what payment details do we have?" could surface it via similarity — pulling a raw PAN into the LLM context as a "relevant memory." Even with purpose-scoping, if the querying purpose is finance-compatible, the predicate might allow it. The do-not-embed flag is a second line of defence: this datum is too sensitive to ever be semantically discoverable, regardless of scope.
Now the honest part — why it's probably not worth it
When I look at that example critically, three things undercut it:
1. It overlaps with purpose-scoping, which you already have. If purpose-limitation is doing its job, the card number is collected under a narrow purpose (payment-execution) and only retrievable under that purpose. The do-not-embed flag is defending against a case the PBAC predicate is already supposed to handle. It's belt-and-suspenders, and you specifically pushed back on bespoke additions.
2. The real problem there isn't embedding — it's that you're storing a raw PAN at all. A card number shouldn't live in conversation memory in the first place; it should be tokenized/redacted at ingestion. The right control is input-side redaction, not a downstream embedding flag. If I'm reaching for do-not-embed to handle PANs, I'm solving the problem in the wrong layer.
3. It adds a data-model field and a decision point ("who sets do-not-embed? the LLM? a classifier? a regex?") — which is real complexity, and the "who decides" question has no clean answer. An LLM-set flag is manipulable; a regex is brittle; a classifier is a whole subsystem.
My corrected recommendation
Drop the touch of C. Go with clean Option A only: everything embeddable is embedded; on erasure, embeddings are hard-deleted; the index sits outside the anchor chain. Don't add per-entry embeddability.
If the PAN-style problem matters for a deployment, handle it where it belongs — ingestion-time redaction/tokenization of obviously-sensitive patterns before an entry is ever stored or embedded — which is a separate, cleaner concern that I'll note as an open item rather than fold into the privacy scope model. That keeps the scope model to its two clean axes (visibility, lifecycle) plus purpose, with no third "embeddability" dimension muddying it.
So: Option A, plain. No C. You were right to push.
That leaves only consent (item 3) — is any near-term deployment consumer-facing with consent as the lawful basis, or are they enterprise/internal? That one fact is all I need to finish.You said: 3 — Consent as a first-class object, or operator-asserted lawful basis?3 — Consent as a first-class object, or operator-asserted lawful basis? => I'd go for Option A, but I would mention in the spec that v3 should cover Option B.What else do we need to define for writing the spec?May 23Claude responded: Honestly?Honestly? Nothing structural. We've covered the architecture end to end, and the remaining items are all things I can write with stated defaults rather than questions that block me. Let me show you the full list so you can confirm there's no gap, rather than just asserting we're done.
Genuinely still-open, but correctly deferred (not blockers — they go in the spec as open/v3)
These are decided to defer, which is itself a decision. I'll write them as explicit open questions:

Embeddings vs. erasure — Option A locked; no residual question.
Consent — Option A (operator-asserted) for v2, Option B noted as v3. Locked.
Ingestion-time redaction of obviously-sensitive data (the PAN problem) — flagged as open, not in v2.
RLS at the DB boundary — app-layer PDP for v2, RLS as v3 hardening. Locked.
Purpose-matching algorithm specifics — we grounded it in PBAC purpose hierarchies but didn't define the exact matching rules. I'll spec the model (hierarchical, compatibility-based) and leave the precise algorithm as an implementation detail with the PBAC literature as the reference. That's the right altitude for a spec.

Things I'll write with a default and flag — tell me only if any is wrong

Token budget numbers (window size, add-on cap, summary trigger thresholds) — I'll give sensible defaults marked "tunable," not hard commitments.
Retention defaults — the issue already said 1 year / indefinite-for-anchors; I'll carry those.
Digest batch cadence (how often you anchor to Verana) — I'll default to a configurable interval, best-effort async.
Phasing — I'll propose a rollout order (memory model → privacy/PBAC → channels → interaction features → integrity/anchoring) since some layers depend on others. You can resequence.

One thing genuinely worth a sentence from you
The document's identity: what is this spec called and what does it supersede? Specifically —

Does v2 replace issue #84's spec (so #84 becomes the v1 draft this obsoletes), or extend it?
Repo/name: issue #84 referenced hologram-generic-ai-agent-vs. Is the rebuilt spec for that same repo, a new repo, or a rename of hologram-ai-agent? This only affects the title/header, but it's the kind of thing you'll want right from the start.

And a format question, since this is a deliverable
How do you want it delivered?

A single markdown spec file (clean, GitHub-ready, drops into docs/ or pastes into an issue) — my default given everything so far has been GitHub-flavoured.
A multi-file set (e.g. 00-overview.md, 01-identity-channels.md, 02-memory.md, 03-privacy.md, …) if you expect this to be large enough that one file is unwieldy — and it will be large given the scope.

My recommendation: one comprehensive markdown file for v2 (easier to review and version as a single artifact), with clear top-level sections we can split later if it grows. But if you'd rather review section-by-section, I can do multi-file.
So the only real asks: (1) what supersedes what + the repo/name, and (2) single-file or multi-file. Give me those and I'll write it.You said: v2 replace issue #84's specv2 replace issue #84's spechologram-ai-agentA single markdown spec fileMay 23Claude responded: Everything's locked.Architected comprehensive markdown specification replacing legacy documentationArchitected comprehensive markdown specification replacing legacy documentationEverything's locked. Writing the spec now — a single comprehensive markdown file, framework-agnostic, opening with the Decisions & Rationale table I promised so you can verify my memory of every fork before reading the detail.Created a file, read a fileCreated a file, read a fileDone. The spec is a single GitHub-ready markdown file, framework-agnostic throughout.
It opens with the Decisions & Rationale table (30 entries, D1–D30) capturing every fork we resolved across this whole conversation — verify that table first, since it's the fastest way to catch anything I misremembered before reading the detail. A few things worth flagging about how I handled specific points:

PBAC prior-art note is in §9.1 as you asked — names PBAC, the PEP/PDP split, and purpose hierarchies, and explicitly frames your work as "standard theory, novel substrate (agent memory)" so the privacy model reads as grounded rather than invented.
Consent (D19 / §9.10 / O1) is Option A for v2 with the v3 seam written in three places: the decision table, the privacy section, and the open-questions table.
Embeddings (D17 / §9.7) landed on clean Option A — no "touch of C." The do-not-embed idea is instead redirected to O2 (ingestion-time redaction) as the correct layer.
The three session-termination triggers (D7 / §7) keep your channel-vs-identity distinction sharp, and the "new connection ≠ new session binding" nuance is called out explicitly so it can't be misread.
Role vs purpose (D14 / §9.3) is its own subsection with the table, since that was the hardest distinction to pin down.

Two deliberate omissions to confirm you're okay with: I kept the token-budget numbers, retention defaults, and digest cadence as "tunable defaults" rather than hard values (§15 O5), and I left the purpose-matching algorithm at the model level pointing to the PBAC literature rather than specifying exact compatibility rules (O4) — both felt below the altitude of a spec, but say the word if you want either nailed down.
When you review, the most useful pushback would be on anything in the D-table that doesn't match your intent, since the prose all hangs off those decisions.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: in D12 => when you say partner-shared, you mean peers in a2a p2p connections?in D12 => when you say partner-shared, you mean peers in a2a p2p connections?May 23Claude responded: Good catch — and the honest answer is that partner-shared was carried over from the GDPR comment's original list without us ever actually defining it for your …Good catch — and the honest answer is that partner-shared was carried over from the GDPR comment's original list without us ever actually defining it for your model. So let me not pretend it has a settled meaning. It doesn't yet. You're forcing the definition now, which is the right thing to do.
Here are the plausible readings, and they're genuinely different:
Reading 1 — your suggestion: A2A peers. partner-shared = visible to a verifiable-service Principal connected over A2A. This is appealing because it maps a visibility scope directly onto a connection type you already have. "Partner" = another agent/org you've established an A2A relationship with.
Reading 2 — the GDPR-comment intent: external organizations, channel-agnostic. In the source comment, partner-shared sat alongside organization-shared as a data-sharing boundary — "my org" vs "a partner org." Under this reading it's about whose data domain can see the entry (an external business partner's principals), independent of whether they arrive via A2A, DIDComm, or AG-UI. A partner org's human employee on AG-UI could fall under partner-shared too.
The tension: Reading 1 ties visibility to transport/connection type; Reading 2 ties it to organizational identity. The rest of your privacy model is firmly identity-based, not transport-based — visibility is about who, and we deliberately separated "who can see" (visibility) from "how they connected" (channel). So Reading 1 would actually be the odd one out: it'd be the only visibility scope defined by how you connected rather than who you are.
That pushes me toward Reading 2, refined for your single-tenant model:

partner-shared = visible to Principals belonging to a configured partner Persona/Org distinct from the agent's own Org — i.e. an external trust domain you've explicitly federated with.

Under that definition, an A2A peer is often the carrier of a partner-shared interaction (because partner orgs typically connect agent-to-agent), but the scope is defined by the partner's organizational identity (ECS-Org), not by the A2A transport. A partner's human on AG-UI would still resolve to that partner Org and get the same visibility.
But here's the thing worth deciding deliberately: do you even need partner-shared in v2? You're single-tenant with Org/Persona as config. If there's only ever one Org in a deployment and partners connect as ordinary verifiable-service Principals with their own roles, then organization-shared + role-based access might already cover everything, and partner-shared is speculative scope you're carrying for a federation feature that doesn't exist yet.
So three options:

Define it as Reading 2 (partner Org identity) and keep it — if cross-org federation is real or near-term.
Drop it from v2, fold any "external but trusted" case into role-based access over organization-shared, and note partner-federation as a future scope — if it's speculative.
Redefine it as Reading 1 (A2A peers) — but I'd argue against this, because it breaks the "visibility = identity, not transport" principle the rest of the model rests on.

My recommendation is 2 for v2, with Reading 2 as the documented definition if/when it returns — don't ship a privacy scope whose semantics you can't yet enforce, since an under-defined visibility tier is worse than an absent one (it invites inconsistent access decisions). But if partner federation is actually on your roadmap, 1.
Which is it — is cross-org/partner federation real for you, or speculative?You said: We need to refine several things.We need to refine several things. First, a peer is authenticated using and ECS-Service credential, and either a ECS-Persona or ECS-Org credential. So principal should be derived from both. If an Organization A has several services let say A1 and A2, and services both Connect to an Organization B service B1, then from B1 peer, A1 and A2 are different principals on the same Organization.
So to me, partner-shared means visibility shared between A1 and A2, as they are from the same Organization.Now, for humans that connect for example to B1. By default, agent must allow defining in its configuration, of which credential schema(s) the presented credential must be, the claims inside the credential should permit defining if an employee or a partner is connecting, and if partner, to which Organization they maps.Tell me what you think, before doing any changeShow moreMay 23Claude responded: This is a significant refinement, and it actually corrects a flaw in my model, not just partner-shared.This is a significant refinement, and it actually corrects a flaw in my model, not just partner-shared. Let me reflect back what you're saying and flag the consequences before touching anything, because it changes the Principal definition itself — which ripples.
What you're establishing
1. A Principal is derived from two credentials, not one.
For a verifiable-service peer:

ECS-Service credential → identifies the service (A1 vs A2)
ECS-Persona or ECS-Org credential → identifies the organization/persona behind it (Org A)

So the Principal identity has two components: a service identity and an organizational identity. My current spec collapsed these into one userIdentity field, which is wrong — it can't express "A1 and A2 are different services of the same Org A."
2. This makes Organization a first-class identity dimension, not just config.
Your A1/A2/B1 example is the key insight:
Org A
 ├── Service A1 ──┐
 └── Service A2 ──┼──→ connect to ──→ Service B1 (Org B)
                  
From B1's view:
  A1 and A2 are DISTINCT Principals
  but SHARE the same organizational identity (Org A)
So a Principal isn't flat. It's (serviceIdentity, organizationIdentity). Two Principals can differ in service identity while sharing organizational identity.
3. partner-shared now has a precise, enforceable meaning.
Not "A2A peers" (my Reading 1, which you've now shown was too coarse — A1 and A2 are both A2A peers but the point is they're the same Org). Not vaguely "a partner org" either. Precisely:

partner-shared = visible across Principals that share the same organizational identity (same ECS-Org/Persona), even when they are different services (different ECS-Service).

So data B1 marks partner-shared for Org A is visible to both A1 and A2, because they're the same partner organization — but not to a service from Org C. That's enforceable: the predicate matches on organizational identity, independent of which service (or how many) that Org connects with.
This is much sharper than anything we had, and it's identity-based (consistent with the rest of the model), not transport-based. Good.
4. Humans get the same organizational treatment, via credential configuration.
For a verifiable-user-agent (human) connecting to B1, the agent-pack configures:

which credential schema(s) are acceptable
which claims determine employee-vs-partner
if partner, which claim maps to which Organization

So a human employee of partner Org A, connecting via DIDComm, also resolves to organizational identity = Org A — and therefore also sees Org A's partner-shared data. This unifies humans and services under one rule: organizational identity is resolved from credential claims, regardless of connection type. That's exactly the kind of channel-agnostic, identity-based consistency the model is supposed to have.
What I think
I think this is right and it's an improvement, with three implications you should confirm:
Implication A — the Principal model splits identity into two axes.
Principal identity =
  serviceIdentity        (who specifically — A1, or a specific human)
  organizationIdentity   (which trust domain — Org A; may be "self"/own-org for employees)
organization-shared then means "same Org as the agent's own Org" (employees), and partner-shared means "same partner Org" (a federated external Org). Both are the same mechanism — match on organizationIdentity — just one matches the home Org and one matches a partner Org. That's elegant: organization-shared and partner-shared collapse into one comparison on organizationIdentity, differing only by whether the Org is home or partner. It might even suggest they're not two separate enum values but one "org-scoped" visibility resolved against the principal's Org relationship. (I'd lean to keeping them as distinct labels for clarity in policy, but note they share one enforcement path.)
Implication B — this resurrects multi-org, but as identity not infrastructure.
We said "single-tenant, Org/Persona as config" (D30). This refinement doesn't break that — there's still one deployment, one B1 — but B1 now must recognize and distinguish multiple external organizational identities (Org A, Org C, …) among the Principals connecting to it. So D30 needs softening: single-tenant deployment, but the identity model is multi-organization-aware — it resolves and distinguishes the org identity of every Principal, home or partner. That's not multi-tenancy (B1 isn't hosting A's data); it's federation-awareness. Worth stating precisely so the two aren't confused.
Implication C — organizational identity must be an indexed dimension (PBAC consequence).
Since partner-shared/organization-shared retrieval now filters on organizationIdentity, that field must be a first-class indexed column on entries and Principals, exactly like visibility/purpose/state (§9.5's access-before-retrieval rule). The scope predicate gains an org term: ... AND (visibility=public OR (visibility IN (org-shared,partner-shared) AND entry.orgIdentity = principal.orgIdentity) OR ...). Cheap to add now, awkward to retrofit.
One thing to nail down before I edit
The employee-vs-partner distinction for humans: you said claims determine whether someone is an employee or a partner, and if partner, which Org they map to. So what's the organizationIdentity of an employee?

Option (i): employees resolve to the agent's own Org identity (so organization-shared = "same org as me, the home org"), and partners resolve to their respective partner Org. One uniform field, home-org is just one value of it.
Option (ii): employees are a distinct category (employee flag) separate from org identity, and organization-shared keys off that flag rather than an org match.

I lean (i) — it's uniform: everyone has an organizationIdentity; the home Org is just one particular value, partners are others, and organization-shared vs partner-shared is simply "does your org equal the home org or a known partner org." One mechanism, no special-casing. But confirm, because it determines whether "employee" is an org-identity value or a separate claim-derived attribute.
Once you confirm (i) vs (ii), I'll update: the Principal model (two-axis identity), D12 (partner-shared definition), D9 and §5.2 (dual-credential resolution for services), D30 (multi-org-aware, single-deployment), §9.5 (org as indexed predicate dimension), the §10 cross-session linking text, and the §14 data model. Want me to also add a short worked example (the A1/A2/B1 scenario) into §9 — it makes partner-shared unambiguous for a reader in a way prose doesn't?You said: So a Principal isn't flat.So a Principal isn't flat. It's (serviceIdentity, organizationIdentity). Two Principals can differ in service identity while sharing organizational identity. => could be (serviceIdentity, personaIdentity) too.May 23Claude responded: Right — and that's not a footnote, it changes the shape of the second axis.Right — and that's not a footnote, it changes the shape of the second axis. Let me make sure I've got it correct before folding it in, because "Org or Persona" as alternatives means the axis isn't "organizationIdentity," it's something more general.
The second axis is "the entity behind the service," which is Org or Persona
A verifiable-service peer presents ECS-Service + (ECS-Org or ECS-Persona). So the second identity component is whichever of those two was presented:
Principal identity =
  serviceIdentity   (ECS-Service — A1, A2, B1 …)
  issuerIdentity    (ECS-Org  → an organization,  e.g. Org A)
              OR    (ECS-Persona → a persona,       e.g. Persona P)
So I shouldn't call the second axis organizationIdentity — that bakes in one of two cases. It needs a neutral name. Candidates: principalAuthority, backingIdentity, issuerIdentity, or just entityIdentity. I lean toward something like subjectAuthority or backingIdentity — the entity that stands behind the service. Whatever we call it, it holds either an Org or a Persona identity, discriminated by which credential type was presented.
Does the A1/A2 sharing logic still hold for Personas?
Your original example was two services of the same Org. The same structure works for a Persona: if Persona P operates services P1 and P2, and both connect to B1, then from B1's view P1 and P2 are distinct Principals sharing the same persona identity — and partner-shared data scoped to Persona P is visible to both.
So the sharing rule generalizes cleanly: partner-shared = visible across Principals sharing the same backing identity (same Org or same Persona), even across different services. The mechanism is identical; only the type of the shared identity differs.
The one question this raises
Org and Persona are conceptually different kinds of thing — an Org is a collective, a Persona is (typically) a single actor's identity. Does that difference matter for visibility, or not?
Two readings:
Reading X — they're equivalent for scoping purposes. Both are just "the backing identity." partner-shared matches on backing-identity-equality regardless of whether it's an Org or a Persona. Simplest. One field, one comparison. The Org-vs-Persona distinction is recorded (you know which kind it is) but doesn't change access logic.
Reading Y — they scope differently. An Org might legitimately have many services sharing data (a company's fleet of agents), whereas a Persona sharing across services might be rarer or mean something different, so you'd want distinct handling or distinct visibility values. More expressive, more complexity.
I lean strongly to Reading X: one backing-identity field, discriminated by type, matched by equality for partner-shared. The Org/Persona distinction is informational (and may matter elsewhere — e.g. you might trust Orgs and Personas differently in policy), but for the visibility comparison it's just "same backing identity or not." Keeps the predicate to one term instead of branching on identity kind.
But there's a subtlety worth your call: when an Org-A service and a Persona-P service both connect to B1, they can never be partner-shared with each other (different backing identities, and different kinds) — which is correct. But should B1's config be able to say "Persona P belongs to Org A" (a persona acting under an org)? If a Persona can be a member of an Org, then backing identity becomes hierarchical (Persona P → Org A), and partner-shared at the Org level would include P's services too. That's a real modeling question: is backing identity flat (Org and Persona are peer, unrelated kinds) or hierarchical (a Persona can belong to an Org)?

Flat: simpler. Org and Persona are independent backing identities; no nesting. partner-shared matches exact backing identity.
Hierarchical: a Persona may map to an Org; partner-shared can be scoped at either level. More expressive, matches real "person acting on behalf of a company" cases, but the predicate now walks a hierarchy.

So, two things to confirm before I edit anything:

Name for the second axis — backingIdentity? subjectAuthority? something in your existing Verana vocabulary I should match?
Flat or hierarchical — are Org and Persona independent peer kinds, or can a Persona belong to an Org (making partner-shared resolvable at the Org level above the Persona)?

My defaults if you have no strong preference: call it backingIdentity, treat it as flat for v2 (exact-match on backing identity for partner-shared), and note hierarchical persona-in-org as a possible v3 extension — because flat is enforceable today with one indexed column and one equality check, while hierarchy is the kind of thing that's easy to add later if a concrete need appears but costly to carry speculatively. But this is squarely your domain model, so tell me.You said: Reading X — they're equivalent for scoping purposes.Reading X — they're equivalent for scoping purposes.Persona P belongs to Org A => will never be possible. They are 2 different Organizational Entities. A Persona can have several services and human users. The difference should be understood as: the responsible of service B1 is an organization. The responsible of service C1 is a Persona.backingIdentityFinally, I think we are missing an ECS to make things better: the ECS-Badge. An ECS-Badge credential is issued by a Verifiable Service that presents an ECS-Organization or ECS-Persona credential. When a human presents an ECS-Badge credential, we just need to resolve the issuer DID to gather who is the backing identity and map the badge to the proper ECS-Org or ECS-Persona.As for Verifiable Services we have ECS-Service + (ECS-Org or ECS-Persona)
for human we would have ECS-Badge  which issuer DID resolves to (ECS-Org or ECS-Persona)Show moreMay 23Claude responded: This closes the model elegantly — humans and services now resolve to a backingIdentity through symmetric paths, which is exactly the channel-agnostic consisten…This closes the model elegantly — humans and services now resolve to a backingIdentity through symmetric paths, which is exactly the channel-agnostic consistency the whole design has been reaching for. Let me reflect it back precisely before editing, because the ECS-Badge introduces an indirection that has to be modeled carefully.
The symmetric resolution model
Verifiable Service (verifiable-service):
   presents  ECS-Service  +  (ECS-Org OR ECS-Persona)
   →  serviceIdentity   = ECS-Service
   →  backingIdentity   = the ECS-Org / ECS-Persona presented directly

Human (verifiable-user-agent):
   presents  ECS-Badge
   →  the Badge's ISSUER DID is resolved
   →  issuer presents (ECS-Org OR ECS-Persona)
   →  backingIdentity   = the issuer's ECS-Org / ECS-Persona (resolved, not presented)
So in both cases the Principal lands on a backingIdentity that is an Org or a Persona. The difference is how:

Service: backing identity is presented directly alongside the service credential.
Human: backing identity is indirect — derived by resolving the badge issuer's DID and reading their ECS-Org/Persona.

This is the unification I was reaching for two turns ago but couldn't name: a badge is to a human what the (ECS-Org/Persona) credential is to a service — the link from an individual actor to the entity that stands behind them. A human "works for / acts under" Org A by holding a badge issued by Org A.
The important consequences I want to flag
1. ECS-Badge resolution is a verification step with real trust dependencies.
For a service, the backing identity is self-contained in what's presented. For a human badge, the agent must:

resolve the issuer DID of the badge,
verify the issuer is itself a legitimate Verifiable Service presenting a valid ECS-Org/Persona,
and only then trust the mapping "this human → Org A."

That's a second verification hop. It means a human's backing identity is only as trustworthy as the badge issuer's own credential chain. The spec must state this explicitly: badge-derived backing identity requires verifying the issuer's ECS-Org/Persona credential, not just resolving the DID. Otherwise anyone could issue themselves a badge claiming "issued by Org A." The trust is in the issuer's verified identity, and the issuer DID resolution is what anchors it.
2. The badge is the human analog of ECS-Service — so what's the human's serviceIdentity?
For services, identity is (serviceIdentity = ECS-Service, backingIdentity = Org/Persona). For a human with a badge, the badge identifies the individual (the human is the leaf actor, analogous to the service being the leaf actor). So the human's first axis — the per-actor identity — comes from the badge (its subject/holder), and the second axis — backing identity — comes from the badge issuer. So:
Principal identity (uniform across both):
   actorIdentity     = ECS-Service (service)  |  ECS-Badge subject (human)
   backingIdentity   = ECS-Org/Persona (presented or issuer-resolved)
I had called the first axis serviceIdentity, but with humans in the picture that's too narrow — same problem we just fixed on the second axis. It should be actorIdentity (the specific actor: a service or a badged human), with backingIdentity (the Org/Persona behind them). That keeps both axes neutral and uniform across connection types. Confirm you're happy renaming serviceIdentity → actorIdentity for this reason.
3. partner-shared now spans humans and services of the same backing identity.
This is the payoff. If Org A has services A1, A2 and human employees E1, E2 (each holding an A-issued badge), then from B1's perspective all four — A1, A2, E1, E2 — share backingIdentity = Org A, and B1's partner-shared-for-Org-A data is visible to all of them, whether they connect as services over A2A or as humans over DIDComm. One scope, one comparison, spanning both connection types. That's the clean, channel-agnostic result the model has been driving toward.
4. organization-shared vs partner-shared — and the home identity.
With backing identity now uniform, the home-vs-partner distinction is just: is the Principal's backingIdentity the agent's own Org/Persona, or a known partner one? B1 (a service backed by Org B) treats:

organization-shared → Principals whose backingIdentity = Org B (B's own services + B's badged humans),
partner-shared → Principals whose backingIdentity = a configured partner (Org A, Persona C, …).

Same mechanism (compare backingIdentity), differing only by whether the matched identity is home or partner. As I noted before, these two share one enforcement path — worth stating, since it's now provably one comparison.
One thing to confirm on the config side
You said earlier the agent-pack configures which credential schemas are acceptable and which claims map employees vs partners. With ECS-Badge, that config becomes: which badge issuers (Orgs/Personas) does B1 recognize, and how does each map to home-org vs a partner identity? So the agent-pack needs a recognized-backing-identities table: a list of Org/Persona DIDs, each tagged as home or partner (and for partners, the partner's identifier used in partner-shared scoping). A badge whose issuer resolves to an identity not in that table → the human is authenticated but backing-identity-unknown → gets only public (and whatever role rules allow), never org/partner-shared. Is that the right default for an unrecognized-but-valid badge issuer — treat as no backing identity (public-only), rather than reject outright? My instinct is yes (authenticate, but no org-scoped visibility), but it's a policy call.

So, to confirm before I make the edits:

serviceIdentity → actorIdentity (covers both services and badged humans) — agree?
Badge trust rule: backing identity from a badge requires verifying the issuer's ECS-Org/Persona credential (DID resolution alone isn't enough) — agree?
Unrecognized badge issuer: authenticate the human but grant no org/partner backing identity (public-scoped only), rather than reject — agree, or prefer reject?
Recognized-backing-identities table in the agent-pack (Org/Persona DIDs tagged home/partner) as the config mechanism — agree?

Once you confirm these four, the edit set is: Principal model (§5.2, §14) → dual/indirect resolution incl. ECS-Badge; D9 + new decisions for badge resolution and the recognized-identities table; D12 partner-shared final definition; D30 backing-identity-aware; §9.5 backing identity as indexed predicate term; §10 cross-session linking; plus the A1/A2/E1/E2/B1 worked example in §9. I'll also add ECS-Badge to terminology.You said: You're right, using Verana's terminology, we talk about Trust-resolving the DID.You're right, using Verana's terminology, we talk about Trust-resolving the DID.The badge should contains claims to identify the human for the Org/Persona that is issuing it. Maybe a userName, roles, photos...What do you think?May 23Claude responded: Both land well, but point 2 is bigger than it looks — the badge isn't just the backing-identity link, it's also where the human's roles and attributes come fro…Both land well, but point 2 is bigger than it looks — the badge isn't just the backing-identity link, it's also where the human's roles and attributes come from. That collapses something I'd been treating as separate. Let me work through it before editing.
On 1 — "Trust-resolving the DID"
Good, I'll use Verana's term. The distinction matters and the vocabulary captures it: it's not a bare DID-document lookup, it's trust resolution — resolving the DID and verifying the issuer's own ECS-Org/Persona credential chain along the way. So the badge → backing-identity step is a trust-resolution of the issuer DID. I'll use that phrasing throughout (and add it to terminology), and drop my clumsier "DID resolution isn't enough" wording — "trust-resolve" already means the verified version.
On 2 — this is the part worth pausing on
You're saying the badge carries claims identifying the human to their Org/Persona: userName, roles, photos, etc. Trace what that means against the rest of the model, because it resolves several things at once:
The badge is the human's complete identity document, not just a backing-identity pointer. It yields three different things in one credential:
ECS-Badge (held by human, issued by Org/Persona) provides:
  1. actorIdentity    ← the badge subject / userName (who this human is)
  2. backingIdentity  ← trust-resolved from the issuer DID (Org A / Persona C)
  3. roles + attrs    ← claims inside the badge (roles, photo, …)
This is elegant because it makes the human path truly symmetric with the service path — but it also changes where roles come from, and that ripples into RBAC.
The ripple: who is the source of truth for a human's roles?
Earlier (§10) I had roles "extracted from verified credential claims (rolesAttribute)" generically. Your point 2 makes it specific and, importantly, makes the issuer the authority for roles. The roles in the badge are assigned by the Org/Persona that issued it. So:

A human's role isn't self-asserted and isn't assigned by B1 — it's assigned by their own backing Org/Persona and carried in the badge.
B1 then maps those issuer-assigned roles onto B1's own RBAC. Org A's badge says this human is an admin at Org A — but what does that mean at B1? B1 must decide whether "Org A admin" grants any B1 role, or just partner + whatever partner-role mapping B1 configures.

That's a real design point: the badge's roles are scoped to the issuer's authority, and B1 needs a mapping policy from "roles as asserted by a partner Org" → "roles/permissions at B1." A partner can't just assert admin and become admin at B1. So the recognized-backing-identities table (from last turn) needs a companion: a role-mapping policy per recognized identity — for the home Org, badge roles likely map directly; for a partner Org, badge roles map through a translation B1 controls (often collapsing to a single partner role, or a restricted subset).
The photo claim is interesting — it connects to auth challenges. You listed photos. A photo claim in the badge is exactly what the face-match auth challenge (§11.4) would verify against. So the badge isn't only identity+roles; it can carry the biometric reference that a later face-match challenge checks liveness against. That's a nice closure — the same credential that establishes identity provides the reference for re-verifying it. Worth noting in §11.4 that the face-match reference can come from the badge.
What I think, netted out
Your point 2 is right and it simplifies the human path, but it forces three things to be explicit in the spec that were vague before:

The badge is the human's identity credential providing all three of actorIdentity, backingIdentity (via trust-resolution of issuer), and claims (roles, attributes, photo). Symmetric to ECS-Service + Org/Persona for services.
Roles in a badge are issuer-scoped authority, so B1 needs a role-mapping policy from badge-asserted roles → B1 roles, configured per recognized backing identity (home maps directly; partners map through B1-controlled translation). This is the safeguard against a partner asserting privileged roles.
Badge claims can feed downstream features — notably the photo as the face-match reference for auth challenges.

The one genuinely new decision I need from you is #2's default: for a recognized partner Org's badge, do partner-asserted roles map to B1 roles at all by default, or does a partner human default to a single partner role (ignoring their asserted roles) unless B1 explicitly configures a mapping?
My strong instinct is the safe default: a partner human gets a baseline partner role only; their issuer-asserted roles are ignored unless B1's config explicitly opts into a mapping. Reason: roles asserted by an external authority shouldn't grant B1 privileges by default — that's the same "don't let the other side widen their own scope" principle we applied to purpose selection (D15). Home-Org badges, by contrast, map their roles directly (B1 trusts its own backing identity's role assignments). Partners are untrusted-by-default for role purposes even when recognized for visibility purposes.
Note this also cleanly separates two things a partner gets: recognition for visibility (partner-shared — yes, they're a known Org A) is independent of role privilege (default minimal). You can be a recognized partner for data-visibility scoping yet hold only a baseline role. Those are the two axes (purpose/visibility vs role) staying properly orthogonal.
Do you agree with that default — home badge roles map directly, partner badge roles default to a baseline partner role unless explicitly mapped? Confirm and I'll fold the whole ECS-Badge model in: terminology (ECS-Badge, trust-resolve), §5.2 symmetric resolution, new decisions (badge-as-identity, issuer-scoped roles + mapping policy, partner-role default), §10 RBAC role-mapping, §11.4 photo→face-match, §14 data model (actorIdentity/backingIdentity, badge fields), and the worked example.You said: I'm not sure we should put the roles or purposes in the badge.I'm not sure we should put the roles or purposes in the badge. If we suppose that the roles and/or purpose are not provided in the badge, how the system will get them for the authenticated user?May 24Claude responded: Good instinct to pull back on that — putting roles in the badge was me over-reading "roles, photos.Good instinct to pull back on that — putting roles in the badge was me over-reading "roles, photos..." in your previous message. Stepping back: there's a cleaner separation if the badge does not carry roles/purposes. Let me work through where they'd come from instead, because the answer turns out to be more consistent with the rest of the model.
If the badge carries identity but not roles, the badge answers "who/which Org," and B1 answers "what may they do"
The badge's job shrinks to identity only:
ECS-Badge provides:
  actorIdentity    ← badge subject (the specific human)
  backingIdentity  ← trust-resolved from issuer DID (Org A / Persona C)
  attributes       ← userName, photo, etc. (identity attributes, NOT authorization)
And roles/purposes come from B1's own configuration, keyed on what the badge established. This is actually better, because it puts the authorization decision where it belongs — with the party granting access (B1), not the party requesting it (the partner). The same principle as purpose selection (D15: never let the requesting side assert its own scope).
Where roles come from: a B1-side mapping keyed on backing identity
The agent-pack already needs a recognized-backing-identities table (Org/Persona DIDs tagged home/partner). Roles attach there, as B1's policy:
recognizedBackingIdentities:
  - identity: did:...:orgB         # B1's own org
    relation: home
    roleAssignment:
        # how B1 assigns roles to its own people
  - identity: did:...:orgA         # a recognized partner
    relation: partner
    roleAssignment:
        # how B1 assigns roles to Org A's people
So when a human authenticates via badge → backingIdentity = Org A → B1 looks up Org A in its table → applies the roleAssignment policy B1 configured for Org A. The role is B1's decision about Org A's people, not Org A's assertion.
But that raises the real question: roles per backing identity or per individual?
This is the fork the badge-without-roles design exposes, and it's worth deciding deliberately:
Option 1 — Role by backing identity (coarse). Everyone from Org A gets the same B1 role (e.g. all of Org A → partner; all home-org people → employee). Simple, fully config-driven, no per-person setup. But B1 can't say "E1 from Org A is an admin here but E2 is not" — granularity stops at the Org.
Option 2 — Role by individual actor (fine). B1 maintains a mapping keyed on actorIdentity (the specific badge subject): "this specific human → these roles." Granular, but B1 must enumerate individuals — and these are external people (partner employees) B1 may not know in advance. Operationally heavy and doesn't scale to partners.
Option 3 — Backing-identity default + individual overrides (layered). Default role from the backing-identity policy (Option 1), with optional per-actorIdentity overrides (Option 2) where B1 needs to single someone out. Best of both: partners get a sane Org-level default with zero per-person config, and B1 can elevate/restrict specific known individuals when it matters.
I lean Option 3. It matches how this actually plays out: you rarely know partner individuals ahead of time, so you need an Org-level default — but you sometimes do know a specific external collaborator and want to grant them more. Home-org people might be handled the same way (department-level default + individual overrides) or, if B1 issues its own people's badges, B1 could maintain a fuller per-individual roster. Either way Option 3 covers it.
What about purpose?
Purpose stays exactly as we designed it (D15) — it does not come from identity at all. Purpose comes from the tool invoked, bounded by the role → permitted-purposes ceiling. So the chain is now fully consistent:
identity (badge / service creds)  →  actorIdentity + backingIdentity
        ↓ (B1 config: recognizedBackingIdentities + roleAssignment)
roles   →  what this principal may do at B1
        ↓ (B1 config: role → permitted-purposes ceiling, D15)
purposes available  →  ceiling on which purposes this principal can invoke
        ↓ (per action: the tool declares its purpose)
active purpose  →  scopes the retrieval (PBAC)
Every step is a B1-side decision keyed on verified identity facts — nothing authorization-relevant is asserted by the connecting party. Identity is presented; roles and purposes are assigned by B1. That's the clean invariant, and dropping roles from the badge is what makes it hold uniformly.
So, netted out
Dropping roles/purposes from the badge is the better design: the badge is pure identity (actor + backing + attributes like photo/userName), and B1 derives roles from its recognizedBackingIdentities config (Option 3: backing-identity default + optional per-actor overrides), with purpose unchanged from D15.
Two things to confirm:

Option 3 for role assignment (backing-identity default + optional per-actor override) — agree, or do you want coarse Option 1 for v2 and overrides later?
The badge still carries identity attributes (userName, photo) — these aren't authorization, but the photo is still useful as the face-match reference for auth challenges (§11.4). Keep that, or should the face-match reference come from somewhere else?

And a small symmetry check for services: a verifiable-service peer presents ECS-Service + Org/Persona — so its roles should also come from B1's recognizedBackingIdentities config keyed on its backingIdentity, exactly like humans, right? (i.e. A1 and A2 get roles from B1's policy for Org A, not from anything in their service credential.) That keeps services and humans fully symmetric on the authorization path too. Confirm and I'll fold it all in.You said: My concern is defining roles for each identity in the agent pack.My concern is defining roles for each identity in the agent pack. It is not very flexible.May 24Claude responded: Right — that's a real flexibility problem, and it's worth confronting head-on before I write any of it in.Right — that's a real flexibility problem, and it's worth confronting head-on before I write any of it in. If B1 has to edit its agent-pack every time a new partner shows up, or every time a partner adds an employee, the config becomes a bottleneck and B1 can't onboard anyone dynamically. Static per-identity config doesn't scale. Let me lay out the ways out, because there are several and they trade off differently.
The core tension
You want roles to be assigned by B1's authority (not self-asserted by the connecting party — the D15 principle), but without B1 having to statically enumerate every identity in config. Those pull against each other only if "B1's authority" must live in the agent-pack file. It doesn't have to. The trick is finding an authority source that's B1-controlled but dynamic.
The options
Option A — Rule-based mapping on claims, not per-identity enumeration.

Instead of listing identities, B1 writes rules over identity facts: "any badge whose backingIdentity has relation: partner → role partner"; "any home-org badge with claim department=finance → role operator." The agent-pack holds a handful of rules, not a roster. New partners and new employees are covered automatically because they match rules, not entries.

Flexible: yes — onboarding a new partner Org needs at most one rule (or zero if a catch-all partner rule exists).
Still B1's authority: yes — B1 wrote the rules; the connecting party can't change them.
Cost: the rules read claims from the credential. Which means claims like department or level do live in the badge after all — but as identity attributes B1 interprets, not as roles the party asserts. That's a meaningful distinction: the partner says "this person is in finance" (a fact about their org), and B1 decides "finance people from a partner get role X." The partner asserts facts; B1 assigns roles from facts. That preserves D15.

Option B — Externalize role assignment to a service / API.

The agent-pack doesn't hold roles at all; it points at an authorization service B1 runs. On authentication, B1 calls out: "here's the actorIdentity + backingIdentity + claims — what roles?" The roster lives in a database/admin UI, editable at runtime without touching the pack.

Flexible: maximally — runtime changes, no redeploy, can be as fine-grained as you like.
Still B1's authority: yes — it's B1's service.
Cost: operational weight (a whole authz service + its own data store), and it's a bigger build. Probably v3, not v2.

Option C — Delegate role assignment back to the backing identity, but B1 sets the ceiling.

Let Org A decide the fine roles of its own people (carried in the badge after all), but B1 controls the ceiling/translation: "whatever role Org A asserts, at B1 a partner can be at most partner-operator." So Org A self-manages its people's granularity; B1 caps what that can mean locally.

Flexible: very — B1 never touches config when Org A hires someone; Org A manages its own roster in its own badges.
Still B1's authority: yes for the ceiling — but you were rightly uneasy about trusting party-asserted roles. This trusts them within a B1-imposed cap. For a home Org (B1's own people) this is natural. For partners it's a judgment call about how much you trust the partner's internal role assignments even when capped.
Cost: you're back to roles-in-the-badge, but now as a capped delegation rather than a blind trust — which is a defensible middle position, especially split by home-vs-partner.

How these combine — and my read
These aren't exclusive. The model that I think actually fits you:

Home Org: Option C — trust your own badges' roles directly (B1 is the authority for its own people, whether it issues badges itself or via its Org). Direct mapping, full granularity, zero per-person config.
Partners: Option A — rule-based mapping over partner claims, with a safe default (partner baseline) and rules to elevate based on claims B1 chooses to honor. No per-identity enumeration; new partners covered by a catch-all rule; specific partners get specific rules only when B1 cares.
Option B noted as the v3 escape hatch when rules-in-config outgrow themselves and you want a runtime authz service.

So the flexibility you're missing comes from rules over claims (Option A) replacing identity enumeration. That's the key move. The agent-pack stops being a roster and becomes a small policy:
roleRules:
  - when: { relation: home }                      → rolesFromBadge      # Option C for home
  - when: { relation: partner }                   → role: partner       # safe default
  - when: { relation: partner, claim.tier: gold } → role: partner-plus  # claim-based elevation
  # unrecognized backing identity → public-only (no rule matches)
Three lines cover "all my people, all partners by default, and gold-tier partners get more" — and it never needs editing when Org A hires someone or when a new bronze-tier partner connects.
What I need from you
The question underneath all this: for partners, are you willing to read claims from the badge (Option A — partner asserts facts like department/tier, B1 maps facts→roles via rules), or do you want B1's role assignment to depend on nothing the partner put in the credential at all (pure backing-identity-relation, so the most granular a rule can get is "partner vs not")?

If you'll read partner claims-as-facts → Option A gives you real flexibility and I'll build role assignment as claim-based rules.
If you won't trust any partner-supplied claim for authz → then partners can only be distinguished at the backing-identity level, and genuine per-partner-person granularity requires either static config (the thing you dislike) or the Option B runtime service. There's no escaping that trilemma: granular partner roles must come from somewhere, and the only sources are (the partner's claims), (B1 static config), or (a B1 runtime service).

So which is it: read partner claims as B1-interpreted facts (A), home-direct + partner-baseline only, defer granularity to a v3 authz service (B), or capped delegation including partners (C)? Your discomfort with static config rules out the enumeration approach either way — that part I'll drop regardless.You said: what we need to take into account is:what we need to take into account is:how usually organization are managing roles internally (IAM with oauth2, saml, etc) so how they will propagate that to the hologram-ai-agent.How a session of connected user will see only MCP tools that are compatible with their role, and what happen if Organization updates user roles (how it propagates to MCP tools)How the purpose (PBAC) will be managed: when in a session an entity requests an action which permitted by its role, how to we classify the related purpose to decide if we give access to the ressource or not?
*May 24Claude responded: Three good questions, and they're connected by one theme I want to name first: you're describing the agent as a relying party in front of an external IAM, not …Three good questions, and they're connected by one theme I want to name first: you're describing the agent as a relying party in front of an external IAM, not as its own identity authority. That reframes everything — roles aren't defined in the agent, they're projected into it from the org's existing IAM. That single reframing dissolves the static-config flexibility problem from last turn, and it changes how all three questions get answered. Let me take them in order, then name the open decision each leaves.
1. How orgs manage roles internally, and how that propagates
Organizations already run IAM — Okta, Entra/Azure AD, Keycloak, Ping — speaking OAuth2/OIDC and SAML, with roles/groups maintained there. They will not re-maintain roles inside your agent-pack (that's exactly the inflexibility you flagged). So the agent has to consume their IAM, not duplicate it. There are two propagation models, and they map onto the two connection types you already have:
For humans (verifiable-user-agent / badge): the badge becomes the bridge credential between the org's IAM and the agent. The flow:
Org IAM (Okta/Entra) — source of truth for roles/groups
   ↓ at badge-issuance time, the org's Verifiable Service issues an
     ECS-Badge embedding the IAM facts (groups, department, etc.)
   ↓ human presents badge → agent trust-resolves issuer → reads claims
   ↓ agent maps IAM-claims → agent-local roles via a small ruleset
The key realization: the badge is a point-in-time projection of the org's IAM state. The org's IAM stays the source of truth; the badge carries a snapshot of it. This is exactly how OIDC ID tokens / SAML assertions already work — claims are a snapshot of directory state at issuance. So you're not inventing a propagation mechanism; you're using the same "claims-as-snapshot" model the IAM world already runs on, with the badge playing the role the ID token plays.
For services (verifiable-service): the ECS-Org/Persona + ECS-Service play the same role — the org's IAM (or service registry) is projected into the service credential.
This answers last turn's tension cleanly: roles aren't enumerated in the agent-pack and aren't blindly self-asserted. They're IAM facts, snapshotted into a verifiable credential at issuance, mapped to agent-local roles by B1's ruleset. B1's authority lives in the mapping rules (small, claim-based — the Option A from last turn), not in a roster. The org's authority lives in what claims it puts in the badge, which mirrors its IAM.

The open decision here — snapshot staleness. A badge is a snapshot. If the org revokes someone's finance group membership in Okta at 2pm, the badge issued at 9am still claims finance. How fresh must role facts be? Options: (a) short-lived badges (re-issued frequently, like short OIDC tokens) — the standard answer; (b) re-fetch from the org's IAM at session start via an OIDC/SAML hop (freshest, but couples the agent to live IAM availability and partly bypasses the credential model); (c) accept snapshot staleness bounded by badge validity period. This is the central design choice for question 1 and it's genuinely yours — it's the classic token-lifetime-vs-freshness tradeoff, now in a VC context.

2. Per-session MCP tool visibility, and what happens when roles change mid-flight
This builds directly on the existing RBAC-filtered-tool design (the good pattern already in the repo: build the agent with only the tools the role can see, not filter after). In the new model:
session established → Principal resolved → roles assigned (Q1's mapping)
   → the set of MCP tools exposed to the LLM = tools whose required-role
     is satisfied by this Principal's roles
   → the LLM literally cannot call what it cannot see
What happens when the org updates roles depends entirely on the Q1 staleness decision — the two questions are the same question. If roles come from a snapshot badge, then within a session the role set is fixed at whatever the badge said; a mid-session change in Okta doesn't reach the live session until the credential is re-evaluated. So you need a re-evaluation trigger. Candidates, in increasing aggressiveness:

Next session only — role changes take effect when the user reconnects with a fresh badge. Simplest; stale within a session.
Per-privileged-action re-check — you already mandate revocation re-check on every privileged use (§11.5 / D8). Piggyback role-freshness on the same hook: when a credential is re-checked for revocation, also re-read its role claims, and rebuild the visible tool set if they changed. This is elegant because the machinery already exists for revocation — roles ride the same re-check.
Push/eager — the org's IAM notifies the agent of a change (webhook), agent rebuilds the session's tool set live. Most responsive, most plumbing, depends on IAM emitting events.

The architecturally clean answer: tool visibility is a pure function of current roles, recomputed whenever roles are re-evaluated — and roles are re-evaluated on the same cadence as revocation (lazy per-action, eager where the IAM supports notifications). So "what happens when roles change" = "the visible tool set is rebuilt on next re-evaluation, and re-evaluation cadence is the revocation cadence (D8)." That ties Q2 to a decision you've already made, which is satisfying — one re-check mechanism serves revocation and role-freshness and tool visibility.

The open decision here — within-session reactivity. Is per-action re-check (lazy) good enough, or do you need eager push from the org IAM? Lazy means a revoked-at-2pm role still works for non-privileged chatter until the next privileged action; eager closes that window but requires IAM webhooks you may not control (especially for partners). My instinct: lazy (piggybacked on the revocation re-check) for v2, eager as a v3 capability where the IAM supports it — identical to the D8 revocation stance, for the same reasons.

3. How purpose (PBAC) is classified when a role-permitted action runs
This is the subtlest, and your phrasing exposes a gap in what we'd settled. We said (D15): purpose comes from the tool, bounded by the role → permitted-purposes ceiling. Your question — "when an entity requests an action permitted by its role, how do we classify the related purpose to decide resource access?" — reveals that "the tool declares its purpose" is too simple, because the same tool can be invoked for different purposes. read_customer_record might be invoked for customer-support or for fraud-audit. Role permits the tool in both cases; purpose must distinguish them; and we said the LLM mustn't pick purpose. So where does the active purpose come from when one tool serves several?
The honest answer is that there are only three places it can come from, and we have to choose:
(a) One tool = one purpose (split the tools). If read_customer_record can serve two purposes, define two tools: read_customer_record_for_support and read_customer_record_for_audit, each with a fixed purpose, each gated by role (only auditors see the audit one). Purpose becomes unambiguous because the toolset encodes it, and which tools you can see is already role-gated (Q2). This is the cleanest fit with everything else — it pushes the purpose decision into the role→tool-visibility layer you already have, and keeps the LLM out of the purpose choice. The cost is tool proliferation.
(b) Purpose bound to the session/interaction context. The session is established for a purpose — declared at session start by the connecting context (e.g. the AG-UI app the human launched is "the support console," which establishes session purpose = customer-support; the audit console establishes fraud-audit). Every tool call in that session inherits the session's purpose. The human can't reframe it mid-conversation because it's set by which application/entry-point they authenticated through, not by what they say. This fits your IAM framing well — the entry-point/app is itself an IAM-governed thing.
(c) Purpose derived from the resource + role combination at access time. When a role-permitted action touches a resource, the PBAC engine classifies purpose from the (role, resource-type, action) tuple via policy. Most "classic PBAC" but also the most machinery, and it can get circular.
My recommendation is (a) as the primary mechanism, (b) as the frame — i.e. tools are purpose-specific (so purpose is never ambiguous at call time), and the session carries a purpose context from its entry-point that (i) determines which purpose-specific tools are even visible and (ii) is recorded for the access log. Concretely, answering your question directly:
entity requests action (LLM calls a tool)
   → the tool is purpose-specific (a) → its purpose is fixed, unambiguous
   → that purpose must be within the role→purpose ceiling (D15) — already checked
     by virtue of the tool being visible at all (role-gated, Q2)
   → PBAC scope predicate built from (principal, role, THIS tool's purpose,
     backingIdentity) → resource retrieval authorized-before-access (D13)
   → access granted only to resources whose (visibility, purpose, state)
     satisfy the predicate
   → logged with the purpose (§9.9)
So purpose isn't "classified" by inference at access time — it's carried by the tool, the tool's visibility is role-gated, and the role comes from IAM-via-badge. The three questions chain into one pipeline: IAM → roles (Q1) → visible purpose-specific tools (Q2) → each tool's fixed purpose drives the PBAC predicate (Q3). No step lets the connecting party choose its own scope; every step is a B1 decision over verified facts.

The open decision here — (a) vs (b) vs (c). Tool-splitting (a) is cleanest but proliferates tools; session-purpose-context (b) avoids proliferation but requires entry-points to declare purpose; resource-derived (c) is most flexible but heaviest. They compose, as above. You need to pick the primary.


Where this leaves the spec
These three questions don't contradict anything decided; they deepen the identity→role→purpose pipeline and expose three new decisions that genuinely need you:

Role freshness / snapshot staleness — short-lived badges vs live IAM re-fetch vs bounded-stale snapshot. (Drives Q1 and Q2.)
Within-session role reactivity — lazy per-action re-check (piggyback on revocation, my lean) vs eager IAM push. (Falls out of #1 + D8.)
Purpose binding mechanism — tool-specific purpose (a, my lean) vs session/entry-point purpose (b) vs resource-derived (c), and how they compose.

And one framing addition I'd want to write in regardless: the agent is a relying party that projects external IAM into agent-local roles via a claim-mapping ruleset — that sentence is the answer to your flexibility worry from last turn, and it should be stated explicitly as the model rather than left implicit.
Before I touch the spec: which way do you lean on the three decisions above — especially #1 (staleness) and #3 (purpose binding), since #2 follows from #1? And do you want me to fold all three questions into the spec now as a new "External IAM integration & the role→purpose pipeline" section, or keep refining here until the pipeline feels right to you?You said: why do the badges should include group, department, etc?why do the badges should include group, department, etc? Is there a reason for that? The benefit I see is that if I use my badge to connect to another Organization, that proves the department I'm working in. Regarding if the IAM changes my group, then the IAM can simply revoke my badge credential, or issue a new one instantly and send it to me through the existing DIDComm connection I have with my Organization's badege issuance service.May 24Claude responded: You've answered your own question better than I did — and in doing so you've resolved the staleness problem I flagged, so let me not over-engineer this.You've answered your own question better than I did — and in doing so you've resolved the staleness problem I flagged, so let me not over-engineer this. Two distinct points in what you said, and the second one is the important correction.
On why groups/department would be in the badge
You've identified the actual reason, and it's narrower than I implied. I was reaching for "the badge carries IAM facts so B1 can assign roles" — but you're right to ask whether that's even needed. The genuine benefit is the one you named: portability of a verifiable claim across trust domains. Your badge proving "I'm in the finance department" is useful precisely when you take it to another Org (B1) that has no access to your home IAM and can't look you up — the credential is the only way B1 learns that fact.
So the principle is sharper than "put IAM facts in badges": put a claim in the badge only when it needs to cross a trust boundary. Department/group earns its place if B1's access rules legitimately depend on it (e.g. "Org A's finance people may see shared finance data"). If B1 only ever distinguishes "Org A vs not Org A," then department in the badge is dead weight. So it's conditional on whether cross-org access rules actually key on intra-org structure. For a home-only deployment, probably not. For genuine partner federation where partners' internal roles matter, yes. That's a per-deployment judgment, not a universal "always include groups."
On staleness — your correction dissolves the problem
This is the part I got wrong by importing OIDC assumptions. In the OAuth/OIDC world, staleness is a real problem because the token is bearer and lives independently — you can't reach back and invalidate a specific issued token easily, so you make them short-lived. But your model has something OIDC doesn't:
A persistent DIDComm channel between the human and their own Org's badge-issuance service. That changes everything. The Org isn't issuing a token into the void — it has a live, addressable relationship with the holder. So when IAM state changes:

revoke the badge (the revocation re-check, D8/§11.5, then catches it — the badge is no longer valid), and/or
push a freshly-issued badge over the existing DIDComm connection, instantly.

So the "snapshot staleness" tradeoff I presented as central is not a real tradeoff in your architecture — because you have a push channel back to the holder. You don't need short-lived badges or a live IAM re-fetch hop. The IAM updates → issuer revokes-and-reissues → holder gets the new badge over DIDComm → next interaction uses fresh facts. Freshness without polling and without short expiry.
This is genuinely better than the OIDC model and it's worth stating in the spec as a deliberate advantage: because the issuer maintains a DIDComm channel to the holder, credential facts are kept fresh by issuer-initiated revoke/reissue, not by short token lifetimes. It collapses my open-decision #1 (staleness) and most of #2 (within-session reactivity) into the revocation mechanism you already have.
The one residual piece: a freshly-issued badge only takes effect when the holder presents it. So there's still a within-session question — if I'm mid-session at B1 and my home Org reissues my badge with reduced privileges, does B1's live session notice? Two cases:

Revocation of the old badge → caught by the per-use revocation re-check (D8) → the privilege is pulled lazily on next privileged action, eagerly if B1 polls/subscribes. This works regardless.
Reissue with changed (not revoked) facts → B1 won't see the new badge until the holder re-presents it. For a live session, the practical trigger is the same revocation hook: if reissue is paired with revocation of the prior badge (your "revoke or issue new one" — ideally both: revoke old, issue new), then B1's revocation re-check invalidates the in-flight session's credential, prompting re-presentation of the fresh badge.

So the clean rule: reissue should always be revoke-old-plus-issue-new, never silent replacement — because revocation is the signal that propagates to live sessions at B1, while the new badge propagates to the holder over DIDComm. The two halves travel different paths and meet at the holder's next presentation.
Net effect on the open decisions

#1 staleness — resolved by you: no short-lived-badge vs live-fetch tradeoff; freshness via issuer-initiated revoke/reissue over the holder's DIDComm channel.
#2 within-session reactivity — collapses into the existing revocation re-check (D8), provided reissue always revokes the prior badge. Lazy per-action by default, eager where B1 subscribes — same as revocation, for the same reasons.
#3 purpose binding — still genuinely open; your message didn't touch it. That's the one I still need.

So two things from you:

Confirm the rule "reissue = revoke-old + issue-new (never silent replace)" — because the whole freshness story for live sessions depends on revocation being the propagation signal.
Back to purpose binding (Q3 from last turn): tool-specific purpose (a, my lean), session/entry-point purpose (b), or resource-derived (c)? This is the last unresolved piece of the identity→role→purpose pipeline, and everything else now hangs on it.
You said: The hologram-ai-agent should check on a regular basis if badge has been revoked.The hologram-ai-agent should check on a regular basis if badge has been revoked. If it has been revoked, sessions must be closed and user must present a new badge. That's independant to the fact that the Org badge issuer can revoke and automatically issue a new badge to user.Similar to services: if a peer is not trustable anymore (its credentials have been expired, revoked, etc) session must be terminated.May 24Claude responded: Agreed, and this is a clean simplification — you've made revocation-checking a uniform, periodic liveness check on the credential underlying every session, ind…Agreed, and this is a clean simplification — you've made revocation-checking a uniform, periodic liveness check on the credential underlying every session, independent of any reissuance. Let me state it precisely and then flag the few things it pins down (and the one it doesn't, which I still need).
The unified rule
For every active session (human OR service):
  the agent periodically re-verifies the credential the session rests on
  — human: the ECS-Badge (and its issuer's trust chain)
  — service: ECS-Service + ECS-Org/Persona

  if the credential is no longer trustable
  (revoked, expired, issuer no longer trustable, …):
      → terminate the session
      → the entity must re-present a valid credential to reconnect
Two things I want to make sure I capture correctly:
1. This is decoupled from reissuance — deliberately. The agent doesn't know or care whether the Org issued a replacement badge. The agent's job is purely: is the credential this session rests on still valid? If not, close. The reissue-and-push to the user is the Org's business, happening over the Org↔user DIDComm channel, entirely outside the agent's concern. The user reconnects to the agent with whatever fresh badge they now hold. This is a good separation — the agent has one responsibility (validate the credential it was given), not two (validate + track replacements). It also means I should remove my earlier "reissue = revoke-old + issue-new" coupling concern — it's not the agent's problem. The agent just periodically checks validity; whatever the Org does about replacement is invisible to it.
2. "Terminate" maps onto the session-lifecycle model (§7, D7). This becomes a cleaner statement of termination trigger #3. Previously I had "Principal credential revoked → all sessions close." Your rule refines it: it's not a one-time revocation event the agent must catch — it's a periodic re-verification that catches revocation and expiry and issuer-trust-loss, uniformly, for humans and services alike. So trigger #3 becomes: "the credential underlying a session fails periodic re-verification → session terminates." One mechanism, all invalidity reasons, both connection types.
What this pins down (and corrects from earlier)

Enforcement is now primarily periodic, not lazy-per-action. Earlier (D8) I leaned "lazy per-action re-check, eager where available." Your rule is stronger and simpler: a regular interval check on every live session, regardless of whether it's doing anything privileged. That closes the gap I worried about (an idle session lingering with a revoked credential until it next does something gated) — periodic checking kills idle sessions too. So D8 should be rewritten: periodic re-verification of every active session's underlying credential; interval configurable; failure → terminate. Per-action re-check can still exist as an additional gate for high-value actions, but the baseline is the periodic sweep.
Symmetry humans/services is now total: same liveness check, same termination, just different credentials underneath. Good — no special-casing.
The check covers the issuer chain, not just the leaf. For a human badge, "still trustable" includes the issuer still being trust-resolvable and valid — if Org A itself loses trust, every badge it issued is suspect, so A-badged humans' sessions should fail the check too. Worth stating: re-verification re-walks the chain (badge → issuer's ECS-Org/Persona), not just the badge in isolation. Same for services (ECS-Service is only as good as the ECS-Org/Persona behind it).


The operational knob: the check interval. Too long → a revoked credential keeps a session alive for up to one interval. Too short → load on the revocation registry / Verana. This is the real tunable, and it directly sets your worst-case exposure window after a revocation. I'll spec it as configurable with a sane default and note the tradeoff, rather than hard-coding — unless you have a target window in mind (e.g. "revocation must take effect within N minutes").

So I'll fold this in as: a single periodic credential-liveness check over all active sessions (re-walking the issuer chain), uniform across humans and services, configurable interval, failure → terminate + require re-presentation; rewriting D8 and termination-trigger #3 accordingly, and dropping the reissue-coupling note as not-the-agent's-concern.

That fully closes the identity / role / credential-lifecycle layer.
The one thing still genuinely open — untouched for two turns now — is purpose binding (Q3): when a role-permitted tool runs, where does the active purpose come from for the PBAC scope decision?

(a) tool-specific purpose — each tool carries one fixed purpose; ambiguity impossible; cost is tool proliferation. (my lean)
(b) session/entry-point purpose — the session is established for a purpose (which console/app the entity entered through); all tool calls inherit it.
(c) resource-derived — purpose classified from (role, resource, action) at access time; most flexible, heaviest.

They compose (I sketched a→primary, b→frame last time), but you need to pick the primary mechanism. This is the last unresolved piece before the identity→role→purpose pipeline is fully specified and I can write the whole thing up. Which way do you lean on purpose binding?You said: maybe it's better to use a combination of periodic and per-action.maybe it's better to use a combination of periodic and per-action. It's nearly a no-cost to check if a credential has been revoked, it's just calling an remote GET service. So it could be evaluated automatically upon user action when it has not been rechecked in the last N seconds for exampleMay 24Claude responded: That's exactly right, and it's a cleaner formulation than treating periodic and per-action as separate mechanisms.That's exactly right, and it's a cleaner formulation than treating periodic and per-action as separate mechanisms. You've collapsed them into one: a freshness-bounded check. Let me state it precisely because the framing matters.
The unified check: TTL-bounded revalidation
There aren't two mechanisms (a periodic sweep and a per-action gate). There's one check with a freshness window:
on any session activity (action, or just a turn):
  if (now - lastChecked) > N seconds:
       re-verify the credential (GET revocation status, re-walk issuer chain)
       lastChecked = now
       if invalid → terminate session
  else:
       proceed (cached validity is still fresh enough)
This subsumes both earlier ideas:

It's per-action in that activity is what triggers a potential check — no wasted checks on idle sessions doing nothing.
It's periodic in effect, because N bounds how stale the validity can ever be for an active session.
It self-throttles — a burst of ten actions in five seconds triggers one check, not ten, because the TTL absorbs them. That's the "nearly no-cost" property you want: the check fires at most once per N seconds per session regardless of activity volume.

So N is the single knob, and it means exactly "maximum staleness of credential validity for an actively-used session." Clean to reason about, cheap to run (one cached GET per N seconds per active session), and it naturally stops checking sessions that stop being used.
The one gap it leaves — and how to close it
Pure activity-triggered checking has one hole: a fully idle session is never re-checked at all, because nothing triggers it. A session that goes quiet with a valid credential, whose credential is then revoked, stays open (idle) indefinitely — it only dies when the user returns and acts. For most cases that's fine (an idle session does nothing, so it's low-risk, and the moment it's used it's checked). But if you want idle sessions positively reaped rather than lingering, you need one of:

Idle timeout — independent of revocation: sessions idle beyond some period close anyway (standard session hygiene; you likely want this regardless). This makes the idle-revocation hole moot — idle sessions close on their own.
A lightweight background sweep — only over sessions whose lastChecked has aged past N, to catch idle ones. More machinery; probably unnecessary if you have an idle timeout.

My recommendation: TTL-bounded check on activity (your design) + a plain idle-session timeout. Together they cover everything — active sessions are bounded-fresh by N, idle sessions are closed by the timeout, so no session ever sits open-and-stale-and-revoked. The idle timeout is good practice anyway and it's simpler than a background revocation sweep. So you get two small knobs with clear meanings: N = max validity staleness while active; idleTimeout = how long a quiet session survives.
How I'll spec it
Rewriting D8 / termination-trigger #3 as: credential liveness is enforced by a TTL-bounded revalidation — on session activity, if the cached validity is older than N seconds, re-verify (revocation GET + issuer-chain re-walk); failure terminates the session and requires re-presentation. A separate idle-session timeout reaps quiet sessions so none lingers stale. Both intervals configurable; N documents the max-staleness-while-active exposure window. Uniform across humans (badge + issuer chain) and services (ECS-Service + backing identity). The reissue/replacement of credentials remains the issuer's concern over its own DIDComm channel, invisible to the agent.
Confirm the idle-timeout addition sits right with you (or say if you'd rather have the background sweep, or neither), and I'll lock the credential-lifecycle layer.
That still leaves purpose binding (Q3) as the one open piece of the identity→role→purpose pipeline — it's been waiting three turns now. When a role-permitted tool runs, where does the active purpose come from: (a) tool-specific fixed purpose (my lean), (b) session/entry-point purpose, or (c) resource-derived? Once you pick the primary, the pipeline is complete and I can write up everything from the last several turns into the spec.You said: OK for a idle-timeout.OK for a idle-timeout. It makes sense to close the session if it has not been used for a while. That just forces user to re-authenticate. Credential-lifecycle layer is locked => update the spec.Tell be when you are finished and we will deep dive the next topicsMay 24Claude responded: I'll update the spec to lock in everything from the identity/credential refinements — the dual-credential model, ECS-Badge, backing identity, the relying-party…I'll update the spec to lock in everything from the identity/credential refinements — the dual-credential model, ECS-Badge, backing identity, the relying-party/IAM framing, and the TTL-bounded credential-liveness layer. Let me view the relevant sections first so my edits are precise.Re-reading the spec sections I need to edit (decisions table, identity, lifecycle, data model)Re-reading the spec sections I need to edit (decisions table, identity, lifecycle, data model)Now I'll make the edits. First, updating D7, D8, D9 in the decisions table and adding new decisions for the identity model.Update D7 termination triggers to reference the unified credential-liveness checkUpdate D7 termination triggers to reference the unified credential-liveness checkNow updating D12 (partner-shared definition) and D30 (tenancy), then adding new decisions D31–D35 for the identity model.Edited 3 filesEdited 3 filesNow the terminology section — add ECS-Badge, backing identity, actor identity, trust-resolve, relying party. Let me view it.Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileNow the big one — section 5 (Identity, Connection & Trust). Let me view it.Viewed 2 filesViewed 2 filesNow I'll replace §5.2 and §5.4 with the full new identity model, adding the IAM/role-assignment and credential-lifecycle subsections.Replace section 5.2 with full two-axis identity model and add IAM/role/lifecycle subsectionsReplace section 5.2 with full two-axis identity model and add IAM/role/lifecycle subsectionsI removed the old §5.3 ("Trust is always established over DIDComm"), whose content I should preserve. Let me re-add it as §5.9 since it's still valid and referenced.Re-add the trust-over-DIDComm content as 5.9Re-add the trust-over-DIDComm content as 5.9Now update §7 (Session Lifecycle) to reflect the TTL-bounded check, and the §9 worked example for partner-shared. Let me view §7.Viewed 2 files, edited a fileViewed 2 files, edited a fileNow §9 — update partner-shared definition and add the A1/A2/E1/E2/B1 worked example. Let me find §9.2.Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileNow update §9.5 (access-before-retrieval) to add backing identity as an indexed predicate dimension, and §10 RBAC for the rule-based assignment and IAM projection. Let me view §9.5.Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileNow §10 (RBAC) — update to reflect rule-based assignment, IAM projection, and the home/partner role defaults. Let me view it.Viewed 2 files, edited a fileViewed 2 files, edited a fileNow §11.4 (auth challenges) — add the photo-as-face-match-reference note, and §14 data model. First §11.4:Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileNow the §14 data model — update the Principal shape. Let me view it.Viewed 2 files, edited a fileViewed 2 files, edited a fileNow update the MessageEntry's backingIdentity for entries and the agent-pack config shapes at the end of the data model. Let me view the tail of §14.Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileI also need to add backingIdentity to the MessageEntry block itself (the indexed-classification area). Let me do that for consistency.Add backingIdentity field to MessageEntry classification blockAdd backingIdentity field to MessageEntry classification blockFinally, the §3 Non-Goals mentioned "Multi-tenancy (single-tenant...)" — let me align that wording with the new federation-aware framing, and check the Goals section references. Let me view §3.Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileLet me verify the document is coherent — check the decisions table count and confirm no dangling references.Verify decisions and section integrityVerify decisions and section integrityAll 35 decisions present and sequential, §5 expanded cleanly into nine subsections. Let me present the updated file.Presented filePresented fileFinished. The credential-lifecycle and identity layers are now fully locked into the spec. Here's what changed in this pass:
Decisions table — extended from 30 to 35 entries. D7, D8, D9, D12, D30 rewritten; D31–D35 added (two-axis Principal identity, symmetric resolution paths, badge-as-identity-only, agent-as-relying-party, rules-not-rosters role assignment).
Terminology — added Actor identity, Backing identity, ECS-Badge, Trust-resolve, Relying party; reworked Principal, Connection type, Role, Visibility.
§5 (Identity, Connection & Trust) — the biggest change, expanded into nine subsections: two-axis (actorIdentity, backingIdentity) model with the A1/A2/E1/E2 diagram, symmetric service/badge resolution with the issuer trust-resolve rule, badge-carries-identity-not-authorization, the relying-party/IAM-projection model with snapshot-via-credential + push-refresh freshness, rule-based role assignment with the home/partner/unrecognized defaults, and the TTL-bounded credential-liveness lifecycle with idle timeout.
§7 (Session Lifecycle) — now four triggers; credential trigger reframed as TTL-bounded revalidation re-walking the issuer chain.
§9.2 / §9.5 — partner-shared defined as backing-identity equality, with the worked example and the concrete SQL-style scope predicate; backingIdentity added as an indexed predicate dimension.
§10 (RBAC) — rewritten around the relying-party model, rule-based assignment, the recognition-≠-privilege orthogonality, a partner row in the matrix, and backing-identity-based cross-session linking.
§11.4 / §14 — badge photo as face-match reference; data model updated to two-axis identity, plus new agent-pack config shapes (RecognizedBackingIdentity, RoleRule, PerActorOverride).
Two small things I resolved with a default rather than stopping to ask, flag if either is wrong: I added a partner role to the example access matrix in §10 (seemed implied by D35's baseline), and I kept the purpose-binding mechanism (Q3) untouched since we never closed it — D15 still says "purpose from the tool," which is option (a), but we never confirmed (a) vs (b) vs (c) as primary.
That last point is the one genuinely open thread from the identity→role→purpose pipeline. Whenever you're ready for the next deep dive, purpose binding is the natural place to resume — or we can take whatever topic you'd prefer.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: D2: Role of DIDComm: DIDComm anchors trust and capabilities, not transport: I think saying "not transport" is too restrictive.D2: Role of DIDComm: DIDComm anchors trust and capabilities, not transport: I think saying "not transport" is too restrictive. It's up to the agent to choose to which channel a kind of message must goMay 24Claude responded: You're right, and it's a meaningful correction — "not transport" overstates it into a prohibition that doesn't match the model we actually built.You're right, and it's a meaningful correction — "not transport" overstates it into a prohibition that doesn't match the model we actually built. Let me make sure I capture the right nuance before editing.
What "not transport" got wrong
The phrase reads as "DIDComm must never carry conversation; conversation only flows over AG-UI/A2A." But that's false in our own model — a human can converse entirely over DIDComm (the original Hologram browser case, which still exists). DIDComm is a perfectly good conversation transport. So the claim isn't that DIDComm isn't transport — it's that it isn't privileged or mandatory as the transport substrate (the Model A vs Model B distinction). Those are different claims, and I conflated them.
What's actually true
Two separate, both-correct statements that "not transport" mashed together:

DIDComm is not the privileged transport substrate. Other channels don't tunnel through it (that was the Model A rejection — D1). The core is channel-agnostic. ✓ — keep this.
DIDComm uniquely can serve trust-bound capabilities (auth, credential exchange, auth challenges) that AG-UI/A2A structurally cannot. ✓ — keep this.

But neither of those says DIDComm can't also carry ordinary conversation. It can. So your point: routing is the agent's decision per message-kind, not a fixed property of the channel. The capability router (§6.2) already embodies this — it asks "which channel serves this?" and DIDComm is eligible for everything, uniquely required for trust-bound things, and not mandatory for ordinary messages when another conversation channel is active.
The precise framing
DIDComm is the most capable channel — it can carry conversation and is the only one that can carry trust-bound capabilities. It's the trust/capability anchor (the thing only it can do), but it is not the mandatory transport (other channels carry conversation directly, not tunneled). Which message goes on which channel is the agent's routing decision via the capability router, constrained only by what each channel can serve (the capability profiles, §6.5).
So the correction is: replace "not transport" with something like "not the privileged/mandatory transport substrate — channel selection per message is the agent's routing decision, bounded by channel capability." That keeps the true claim (no tunneling, channel-agnostic core) and the capability uniqueness, while dropping the false implication that DIDComm is barred from carrying conversation.
Let me make the edit to D2 (and I'll check D1's wording and §5.9's heading don't carry the same overstatement).Correct D2 to not overstate DIDComm as non-transportCorrect D2 to not overstate DIDComm as non-transportNow let me check the other places that carried the same overstatement — the §5.9 heading, the D2 reference in §5.9, and any "not transport" phrasing elsewhere.Find related overstatements to alignFind related overstatements to alignThe remaining "capability channel" usages are all correct — they refer to DIDComm's role in trust-bound capability routing, which is accurate. The only overstatement was the §5.9 heading and its opening line ("Trust is always established over DIDComm"). The "always" is true for trust establishment, but the surrounding framing should make clear this is about capability-uniqueness, not transport-exclusivity. Let me view and lightly adjust §5.9.Viewed a file, edited a file, read a fileViewed a file, edited a file, read a fileDone. Corrected in two places:
D2 now reads as "trust & capability anchor," explicitly stating DIDComm is not the privileged or mandatory transport substrate (no tunneling, channel-agnostic core) while making clear it may also carry conversation — with channel selection per message-kind being the agent's routing decision bounded by capability profiles. The rationale cites the Hologram-browser-only case as the proof that DIDComm-as-conversation-transport is valid.
§5.9 retitled from "Trust is always established over DIDComm" to "DIDComm as the trust & capability anchor," and rewritten so the "always" attaches correctly — trust-bound operations always route to DIDComm because only it has wallet/sensors, not because other channels are barred from conversation. Added the explicit eligibility framing: DIDComm is eligible for everything, required only for the three trust-bound capabilities, and not mandatory for ordinary conversation when another channel is active.
The distinction you drew is now clean throughout: DIDComm is uniquely capable, not exclusively used — and routing is the agent's call within what each channel can serve. The other "capability channel" references I checked are all correct as-is, since they refer specifically to trust-bound capability routing rather than to transport exclusivity.
Whenever you're ready, the still-open purpose-binding mechanism (D15 / Q3 — tool-specific vs session/entry-point vs resource-derived) remains the natural next deep dive.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: now D2 text is too long.now D2 text is too long. Summarize a put only the needed informationMay 24Claude responded: Done — D2 trimmed to the essentials: the trust/capability-anchor role, the "not privileged transport / may also carry conversation" correction, and the routing…Edited a file, read a fileEdited a file, read a fileDone — D2 trimmed to the essentials: the trust/capability-anchor role, the "not privileged transport / may also carry conversation" correction, and the routing-decision point, with a brief rationale. The longer explanation still lives in §5.9 for anyone who wants the full reasoning.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: D23: what do you mean by input is blocked?D23: what do you mean by input is blocked?May 24Claude responded: Good question to flag, because re-reading D23, my wording is genuinely ambiguous and possibly wrong for your model.Good question to flag, because re-reading D23, my wording is genuinely ambiguous and possibly wrong for your model. Let me explain what I intended, then question whether it's even right.
What I meant
D23 came from lotharking's comment about event-driven image generation. The scenario: the agent is generating an image (which can take many seconds), and the question is what happens if the user sends another message during that generation.
"Input is blocked" was shorthand for: the agent stops accepting new user messages into the conversation flow until the generation completes — the session goes into a generating state, and messages that arrive during that window are held/rejected rather than processed.
The stated reason was lotharking's: "shouldn't keep accepting messages during generation; otherwise, we lose the time point where it occurred." The worry is ordering — if the image was conceptually "sent at T" but the user fires three messages while it renders, the transcript ordering of the image relative to those messages gets muddled.
Why I now think it's questionable
Re-reading it, "block input" is a heavy, UX-hostile mechanism, and it may be solving a problem we already solved a better way. Two issues:
1. It contradicts the rich memory model. Every MessageEntry is timestamped and ordered (§8, §14). If the image's entry records when generation was initiated (the time-point), then ordering is preserved by the timestamp regardless of what arrives during rendering. You don't need to block input to "not lose the time point" — the time-point is a field on the entry, captured at initiation. So lotharking's stated justification may already be handled by the data model, making the block unnecessary.
2. Blocking input is bad in a multi-channel world. With AG-UI and DIDComm potentially both active, "block input" is ambiguous — block on which channel? All of them? A long generation freezing the whole conversation across every channel is a poor experience, especially for something asynchronous by design (the whole point of event-driven generation is not to block).
The real question for you
There are three defensible behaviors, and I should let you pick rather than having silently encoded the most restrictive one:

(a) Block — what D23 currently says. Reject/hold new input until generation finishes. Strongest ordering guarantee, worst UX. Justified only if your LLM/turn model genuinely can't interleave a pending tool result with new input.
(b) Accept but order by timestamp. Keep accepting messages; the generated image lands in the transcript at its initiation timestamp (or completion timestamp — your choice), and ordering is reconstructed from timestamps, not from arrival blocking. Best UX, relies on the entry's time-point field. This is what the rich memory model already enables.
(c) Accept, but mark the in-flight generation so the LLM knows it's pending. Like (b), plus a generating state surfaced to the LLM so it can say "still working on your image" if the user asks. Most conversational.

My instinct now is that (b) or (c) is right, not (a) — the timestamp-ordering of MessageEntries makes the "lose the time point" worry moot, and blocking fights the asynchronous, multi-channel design. lotharking's concern was valid for a flat string memory (where there's no timestamp to order by), but we've replaced that model — so the justification for blocking largely evaporates.
So: did you read "input is blocked" as the right behavior, or should D23 change? My recommendation is to rewrite it as "generation is event-driven and non-blocking; the generated artifact is persisted as a MessageEntry ordered by its initiation timestamp; the session exposes a generating state to the LLM (option c) but does not block input." That keeps lotharking's ordering goal (via timestamps) while dropping the input-blocking, which doesn't fit the rich-memory, multi-channel model.
Want me to rewrite D23 that way, or do you actually want hard input-blocking for a reason on your side (e.g. a turn-model constraint I'm not seeing)?You said: (b), initiation timestamp.(b), initiation timestamp. Update.,May 24Claude responded: Now update the matching prose in §13.Rewrite D23 to non-blocking, timestamp-ordered image generationRewrite D23 to non-blocking, timestamp-ordered image generationNow update the matching prose in §13.2.Edited a file, read a fileEdited a file, read a fileDone. Both D23 and §13.2 now specify option (b): event-driven, non-blocking, with the generated artifact persisted as a MessageEntry ordered by its initiation timestamp — so ordering is preserved by the timestamp rather than by pausing input. The generating state is kept only as an optional signal to the LLM (so it can say "still working on it"), not as an input gate.
This also removed the last remnant of the flat-string-era thinking from the spec — the input-blocking was a workaround for not having ordered, timestamped entries, which the rich memory model makes unnecessary.
Next natural deep-dive whenever you want it remains purpose binding (D15 / Q3) — still the one unresolved piece of the identity→role→purpose pipeline.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: D33, maybe claims could be:D33, maybe claims could be:userNametitle (aka CEO, Janitor,...)department: Finance Departmentphoto...May 24Claude responded: Right — those are good, and they sharpen what kind of claims a badge carries.Right — those are good, and they sharpen what kind of claims a badge carries. But I want to be careful before editing, because your list mixes two categories that the spec needs to keep distinct, and getting them muddled would reopen the roles-vs-identity question we already settled.
Two kinds of claim in your list

userName, photo → pure identity attributes. Who this person is / what they look like. Uncontroversially identity.
title (CEO, Janitor), department (Finance) → organizational-position attributes. These describe the person's standing within their backing Org.

The subtlety: title and department look a lot like authorization inputs ("CEO → admin"). And that's fine — as long as they remain facts B1 interprets, not roles B1 is told to honor. The badge says "this person is a CEO at Org A" (a verified fact about Org A's structure). It does not say "this person is an admin at B1" (an authorization claim). B1's roleRules (§5.6) decide whether "CEO at Org A" maps to any B1 privilege. So your list is good precisely because title/department are descriptive facts, not role assertions — they're exactly the "claims that earn their place by crossing a trust boundary" from D33.
This is consistent with everything: the badge carries identity + organizational-position facts; B1's rules turn (some of) those facts into B1 roles; the connecting party never asserts its own B1 privilege.
One thing worth stating, not just listing
The risk in just listing example claims is that it reads as "these specific fields are the schema." They're not — they're examples, and which claims a badge carries is issuer-defined and deployment-dependent (D33's "claims earn their place only when they cross a trust boundary"). A janitor badge and a CEO badge from the same Org carry the same schema; the values differ. And a deployment that never keys access on title/department shouldn't demand them.
So I'd frame it as: identity attributes (userName, photo) are the baseline; organizational-position attributes (title, department, …) are optional, issuer-defined facts included when cross-domain rules need them — interpreted by B1, never authoritative as roles.
A question your examples raise
title: CEO vs department: Finance — these can both feed roleRules, but they're different axes (seniority vs function). Do you want the spec to treat them as just an open bag of claim.* facts (so a rule can match claim.title or claim.department or anything else the issuer put there), or do you want a defined minimal claim vocabulary the badge schema standardizes on?

Open bag (my lean): roleRules match arbitrary claim.<key>; the badge schema is issuer-defined; B1 matches whatever keys it cares about. Maximally flexible, no central schema to agree on. The example list in D33 is purely illustrative.
Defined vocabulary: the spec names a standard set (userName, title, department, photo, …) that badges SHOULD use, so rules across deployments are portable. More interoperable, but it's a schema-standardization effort that may belong to the ECS-Badge credential definition itself, not this spec.

My instinct is open bag in this spec, with a note that a standardized claim vocabulary is an ECS-Badge-schema concern (Verana/credential layer), not the agent spec's to define — because the agent just needs "rules can match arbitrary verified claims," and pinning the vocabulary here would couple the agent spec to a credential-schema decision that lives elsewhere.
So before I edit D33: do you want the example claims as illustrative-only (open bag), or do you want this spec to define a minimal standard claim vocabulary? Either way I'll add your examples — the question is just whether they're "e.g." or "the schema."You said: title and department are only informative, it's decision of the Organization that verifies the credential to assign roles based on this information or not.title and department are only informative, it's decision of the Organization that verifies the credential to assign roles based on this information or not.May 24Claude responded: Exactly — that's the clean separation, and it confirms the open-bag approach.Exactly — that's the clean separation, and it confirms the open-bag approach. title and department are verified facts the issuer asserts; whether they mean anything for authorization is entirely B1's decision via its rules. The badge never says "grant this person a role" — it says "this person holds this position at Org A," and B1 chooses to honor that, ignore it, or map it however it wants. Let me update D33 to make this explicit.Refine D33 with example informative claims and the facts-not-roles distinctionRefine D33 with example informative claims and the facts-not-roles distinctionLet me view the current D33 — an earlier edit likely changed it.Ran a command, edited a fileRan a command, edited a fileNow align the §5.4 prose, which lists the badge attributes. Let me view it.Viewed a file, edited a file, read a fileViewed a file, edited a file, read a fileDone. Both D33 and §5.4 now list the example claims (userName, photo, title, department) and, crucially, frame them correctly: they're verified facts the issuer asserts, never role assertions, and it's entirely B1's decision whether to map any of them to a role via roleRules. The spec now states the distinction sharply with the "CEO at Org A is a fact; admin at B1 is B1's mapping choice" line, which keeps the identity-vs-authorization boundary clean.
The open-bag approach is preserved implicitly — §5.4 lists these as examples ("etc."), and roleRules (§5.6) already match arbitrary claim.*, so the badge schema stays issuer-defined rather than pinned by this spec.
Whenever you're ready: purpose binding (D15 / Q3) is still the one open piece of the pipeline.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: D34: we should provide 2 configuration options: define roles and mapping in the agent pack (simple deployment), or connect an IAM (complex deployment)D34: we should provide 2 configuration options: define roles and mapping in the agent pack (simple deployment), or connect an IAM (complex deployment)May 24Claude responded: That's a clean way to scope it — it acknowledges that not every deployment has an IAM to connect to, while not forcing IAM complexity on simple ones.That's a clean way to scope it — it acknowledges that not every deployment has an IAM to connect to, while not forcing IAM complexity on simple ones. But before I edit, I want to make sure the two options are cleanly separated, because they're answering slightly different questions and it's easy to conflate them.
The two options answer different questions
The thing to be careful about: "where do roles get defined" and "where do roles get assigned to a principal" are separable, and your two options actually differ on both axes. Let me lay out what each option means concretely:
Option 1 — Agent-pack-native (simple deployment)

Roles are defined in the agent-pack (the roleRules + role list we already spec'd).
Roles are assigned by mapping verified credential facts (badge claims: title, department, backingIdentity relation) → roles, via those rules.
The source of truth for "what facts a principal has" is the credential itself.
No external system. Self-contained. This is what §5.6 already describes.

Option 2 — External IAM (complex deployment)

Here's the question that matters: does connecting an IAM change assignment (the agent asks the IAM "what roles does this principal have?") or does it change definition (roles live in the IAM's model)?
Two sub-readings:

2a — IAM as the assignment authority at runtime: on authentication, the agent calls the IAM ("here's the resolved identity — what roles?") and the IAM returns roles from its directory. The credential establishes identity; the IAM establishes roles. This is the OIDC/SAML "claims from the IdP" model.
2b — IAM as the issuance source, projected into credentials: the IAM's state is baked into the badge at issuance (the snapshot model from our earlier discussion), and the agent still maps claims→roles via rules — so it's really Option 1 with the IAM upstream of badge issuance.



These are genuinely different. 2a means a live runtime dependency on the IAM (the agent calls out during the session). 2b means no runtime IAM dependency — the IAM influence is entirely upstream, in what the badge contains. We actually discussed 2b extensively (the "claims-as-snapshot, freshness via revoke/reissue" model) and concluded it dissolves the runtime-IAM coupling. So I want to know which "connect an IAM" you mean.
Why it matters
If Option 2 = 2a (runtime IAM call), it reintroduces something we deliberately designed away: a live dependency on IAM availability during a session, and the staleness question (the IAM answer is fresh, but now the agent is coupled to the IAM being up). It's a legitimate option — it's exactly how enterprise SSO works — but it's a different trust/availability profile than the credential-snapshot model.
If Option 2 = 2b (IAM upstream of issuance), then it's not really a separate agent configuration at all — the agent always does "map credential claims → roles via rules," and whether those claims came from a human-entered badge or an IAM-fed badge issuance is invisible to the agent. In that case the two options aren't "agent-pack vs IAM," they're "where the badge's claims originate," which is the issuer's concern, not the agent's.
My read
I think you most likely mean a blend, and the cleanest framing is:

Option 1 (simple): roles defined and assigned entirely within the agent-pack, mapping credential claims → roles via roleRules. No external dependency. (= current §5.6.)
Option 2 (complex): the agent delegates role assignment to an external IAM at authentication time (2a) — the IAM is the runtime authority for "which roles does this identity have," via OIDC/SAML/SCIM or a directory lookup. The agent-pack then only needs to map IAM-returned roles/groups → agent-local roles (a thinner mapping), not derive roles from raw badge facts.

Under that framing, both options share the same enforcement (roles → tool visibility → PBAC), and differ only in where role assignment comes from: rules over credential claims (1) vs an IAM query (2). That's a clean, real distinction, and it keeps everything downstream identical.
But I need you to confirm two things before editing D34:

Which reading of "connect an IAM" — runtime IAM query (2a, live dependency), or IAM-upstream-of-badge-issuance (2b, no runtime dependency)? This is the crux.
If 2a: what's the failure mode when the IAM is unreachable at authentication — deny (fail-closed), or fall back to a baseline role? (Parallels the D27 revocation-unavailable stance.)

My instinct: you mean 2a (a genuine "plug in your corporate IAM" option for enterprises), in which case I'll spec Option 1 and Option 2 as two assignment sources feeding identical downstream enforcement, with 2a fail-closed by default. But confirm the reading, because 2a and 2b have very different architectural footprints and I don't want to write the wrong one in.You said: let's include only the Option 1 for this v2 spec.let's include only the Option 1 for this v2 spec. We'll keep the IAM integration for v3May 24Claude responded: Good call — that keeps v2 self-contained with no external runtime dependencies, and IAM integration is exactly the kind of thing that benefits from being desig…Good call — that keeps v2 self-contained with no external runtime dependencies, and IAM integration is exactly the kind of thing that benefits from being designed on its own rather than rushed in. Let me update D34 to scope it to Option 1, move the IAM-projection framing out of the normative text, and add the v3 note.Scope D34 to Option 1 (agent-pack-native roles), defer IAM integration to v3Scope D34 to Option 1 (agent-pack-native roles), defer IAM integration to v3Now §5.5 — it's currently titled "The agent is a relying party over external IAM" and leans on the IAM-projection framing. Let me view and rework it to Option-1-native, keeping the snapshot/freshness insight (which still applies to badge claims) but reframing IAM as the v3 upstream.Viewed a file, edited a fileViewed a file, edited a fileNow add O8 to the deferred/open-questions table for the IAM integration. Let me view it.Viewed 2 filesViewed 2 filesO6 references the old eager-revocation framing, which we replaced with the TTL-bounded model. Let me fix O6 and add O8.Fix O6 to TTL framing and add O8 for IAM integrationFix O6 to TTL framing and add O8 for IAM integrationLet me verify there are no other lingering references to the old "projects external IAM" framing that would now contradict the v2/v3 split.Check for lingering IAM-projection referencesCheck for lingering IAM-projection referencesTwo lines still carry the old "projected external IAM" framing that now slightly overclaims for v2 — the Relying party terminology (line 88) and the §10 RBAC text (line 713). They imply IAM projection is intrinsic, when in v2 roles come from credential facts via rules, with IAM as the v3 upstream. Let me soften both to be accurate for v2.Edited 2 files, viewed a file, read a fileEdited 2 files, viewed a file, read a fileDone. The IAM-vs-agent-pack split is now consistently scoped across the whole spec:

D34 retitled "Role source: agent-pack-native (v2)" — Option 1 only, IAM (Option 2) explicitly deferred to v3.
§5.5 retitled and reworked: roles are agent-pack-native in v2, no runtime dependency; the credential-snapshot + revoke/reissue freshness insight is preserved (it still applies to badge claims, independent of IAM); IAM-as-runtime-authority moved to a v3 callout.
O8 added to the open-questions table for external IAM integration; O6 also corrected to the TTL-bounded N framing (it still referenced the old eager-revocation model).
Relying-party terminology and the §10 RBAC bullet softened so neither implies IAM projection is intrinsic to v2 — both now say "verified credential facts → roles via rules," with IAM noted as the v3 extension.

The result: v2 is fully self-contained with no external runtime identity dependency, and the door to IAM integration is clearly marked without any half-committed machinery bleeding into the v2 normative text.
That still leaves purpose binding (D15 / Q3) as the one genuinely open design question in the pipeline whenever you want to tackle it.Hologram ai agent spec v2Document · MD DownloadYou said: Conversation session : A Principal may hold several concurrently (e.Conversation session : A Principal may hold several concurrently (e.g. multiple AG-UI screens for verifiable-user-agents). => may hold several concurrently to different verifiable-services
same for verifiable-service to verifiable-serviceMay 24Claude responded: Right — you're pointing out that the multi-session statement is scoped too narrowly.Right — you're pointing out that the multi-session statement is scoped too narrowly. It frames concurrency as a human/AG-UI thing ("multiple screens"), but concurrency is actually general: any Principal can hold multiple concurrent sessions, and the counterpart matters. Let me make sure I capture the full generality before editing, because there are two distinct dimensions here.
Two independent reasons a Principal holds several sessions
1. Multiple sessions with the same counterpart — the AG-UI-screens case I already had (one human ↔ one agent B1, several screens).
2. Multiple sessions with different counterparts — the case you're adding. A Principal connects to several different verifiable-services concurrently:

A human (verifiable-user-agent) connected to B1, C1, D1 at the same time.
A service (verifiable-service) A1 connected to B1, C1, D1 at the same time — agent-to-agent fan-out.

These are orthogonal: a Principal could have two screens on B1 and one session on C1 simultaneously. So "may hold several concurrently" is true along both axes.
But this surfaces a subtlety worth checking — whose perspective is the spec written from?
The spec is written from the perspective of one deployed agent (B1). From B1's point of view, it sees the sessions it hosts. So when we say "a Principal may hold several concurrent sessions," there are two readings:

Within B1: the Principal has several sessions with B1 (multiple AG-UI screens, or — for a service — multiple concurrent A2A conversations with B1, if that's even meaningful).
Across agents: the Principal also has sessions with C1, D1 — but B1 doesn't see those. They're other agents' sessions. B1 has no visibility into a Principal's relationship with C1.

Your point #2 (sessions to different verifiable-services) is the across-agents reading. And it's true and worth stating — but with the caveat that B1 only manages its own sessions. A Principal's sessions with other agents exist, but they're outside B1's session table. This matters because it bounds what "the Principal's sessions" means in, e.g., the session-termination rules (§7) and cross-session memory (§9): those only ever concern B1's own sessions with that Principal, never sessions the Principal has elsewhere.
So I want the edit to capture both the same-counterpart and different-counterpart concurrency, while being precise that the spec governs only the sessions this agent hosts.
One thing to confirm
For D4 (capability-channel cardinality), we said "A2A: 1:1 — one A2A session ↔ one DIDComm channel." Your point raises: can a service-Principal hold multiple concurrent A2A sessions with the same B1? Or is service↔B1 inherently one session, and the multiplicity is only across different agents (A1↔B1, A1↔C1)?

If a service has at most one session per counterpart, then for B1, a service-Principal has exactly one session, and multiplicity for services is purely across-agents (which B1 doesn't see anyway).
If a service can open several concurrent A2A conversations with the same B1, then the within-B1 multiplicity applies to services too, and D4's "1:1" needs a small clarification (1:1 per session, but a Principal could have N sessions each with its own channel).

My instinct: a service↔B1 relationship is one session (multiple concurrent conversations with the same peer is unusual for agents and adds little), so within-B1 multiplicity is mainly the human/AG-UI case, while across-agents multiplicity applies to everyone but is invisible to B1. But you know the A2A usage patterns better — do you expect a single service to hold multiple simultaneous sessions with the same agent, or just one-per-peer?
Once you confirm that, I'll update the Conversation session definition (and, if needed, a clarifying note on §7/§9 that "the Principal's sessions" always means this-agent-hosted sessions). How do you see the service-to-same-agent case?